Argument

Into the Essay
From The Working Class in Hamlet

There’s a lot for working-class folks to hate about Hamlet—not just because it’s old,
dusty, difficult to understand, crammed down our throats in school, and filled with frills,
tights, and those weird lace neck thingies that are just socially awkward to think about.
Peak Renaissance weirdness. Claustrophobically cloistered inside the castle of Elsinore,
quaintly angsty over royal family problems, Hamlet feels like the literary epitome of
elitism. “Lawless resolutes” is how the Wittenberg scholar Horatio describes the soldiers
who join Fortinbras’s army in exchange “for food.” The Prince Hamlet who has never
worked a day in his life denigrates Polonius as a “fishmonger”: quite the insult for a royal
advisor to be called a working man. And King Claudius complains of the simplicity of
"the distracted multitude.” But, in Hamlet, Shakespeare juxtaposed the nobles’
denigrations of the working class as readily available metaphors for all-things-awful with
the rather valuable behavior of working-class characters themselves. When allowed to
represent themselves, the working class in Hamlet are characterized as makers of
things—of material goods and services like ships, graves, and plays, but also of ethical
and political virtues like security, education, justice, and democracy. Meanwhile,
Elsinore has a bad case of affluenza, the make-believe disease invented by an American
lawyer who argued that his client's social privilege was so great that it created an
obliviousness to law. While social elites rot society through the twin corrosives of
political corruption and scholarly detachment, the working class keeps the machine
running. They build the ships, plays, and graves society needs to function, and monitor
the nuts-and-bolts of the ideals—like education and justice—that we aspire to uphold.

Argument statement.

From Is Hamlet a Sexist Text?

I have argued that the presence of a critique of misogyny and patriarchy as tragic
suggests progressive impulses in Shakespeare, relative to his time and place, operating
simultaneously with unconscious bias. Of all the terms we might apply to the various
manifestations of gender issues in Shakespeare’s plays—misogyny, patriarchy, sexism,
feminism—implicit bias is the most satisfying. On the one hand, it acquits Shakespeare
from charges of bigotry and hostility that are difficult to defend after closely reading his
works. On the other hand, it holds Shakespeare accountable for the diminished status of
women in his plays. It acknowledges Shakespeare’s visions of misogyny and patriarchy
as sources of tragedy, as well as acts of misogyny and patriarchy in Shakespeare’s own
writing practices. Because the sexism of Hamlet is structural rather than polemical, it is
more subtle than we are accustomed to observing in Renaissance texts. Shakespeare’s
sexism “metamorphosed,” as Banaji and Greenwald describe racism in America, “into
harder-to-see forms.”

Argument statement.

108

