“The Earth has one moon” depends not upon the English language, but upon
something exterior to the language. Since the self-standing elements of our
propositional logic are sentences, and the most important property of these is
their truth value, the only semantic feature of sentences that will concern us in
our propositional logic is their truth value.
Whenever we introduce a new element into the propositional logic, we will specify its syntax and its semantics. In the propositional logic, the syntax is generally
trivial, but the semantics is less so. We have so far introduced atomic sentences.
The syntax for an atomic sentence is trivial. If P is an atomic sentence, then it is
syntactically correct to write down
P
By saying that this is syntactically correct, we are not saying that P is true. Rather,
we are saying that P is a sentence.
If semantics in the propositional logic concerns only truth value, then we know
that there are only two possible semantic values for P; it can be either true or
false. We have a way of writing this that will later prove helpful. It is called a
“truth table”. For an atomic sentence, the truth table is trivial, but when we look
at other kinds of sentences their truth tables will be more complex.
The idea of a truth table is to describe the conditions in which a sentence is true
or false. We do this by identifying all the atomic sentences that compose that sentence. Then, on the left side, we stipulate all the possible truth values of these
atomic sentences and write these out. On the right side, we then identify under
what conditions the sentence (that is composed of the other atomic sentences) is
true or false.
The idea is that the sentence on the right is dependent on the sentence(s) on the
left. So the truth table is filled in like this:
Atomic sentence(s) that
compose the dependent
sentence on the right
All possible combinations of
truth values of the composing
atomic sentences

Dependent sentence composed of the
atomic sentences on the left
Resulting truth values for each possible
combination of truth values of the
composing atomic sentences

1. Developing a Precise Language | 15

