Two major types of preference ascription are the instances
of
(1) x prefers to F rather than to G
and of
(2) x prefers that p rather than that q
To prefer to F rather than to G is to prefer one option, one
course of action, to another, to prefer to travel widely
rather than to read widely, to prefer to smoke rather than
not to. But one may think that this preference is just to
prefer that one travels widely rather than that one reads
widely, that one smokes rather than that one does not
smoke. Then it seems that instances of (1) are merely a
special case of type (2), which might be called propositional preference. But instances of (2) range over many things
other than options. They range over outcomes and many
other types of states of affairs. One may, for example, prefer that society be arranged in one way rather than another. Similarly, one’s preferences for certain preferences
rather than others, certain emotions rather than others,
are typically propositional preferences.
The term “propositional preference” (cf “propositional
knowledge”), like my reference to states of affairs, may
suggest that instances of (2) should be understood as relations between a subject, on the one hand, and two states
of affairs or propositions, on the other hand. But there
is a less baroque way of understanding instances of
(2), which goes back to Prior: “prefers that…rather than
that…” may be understood as a prenective or hybrid connective, which takes a name and two sentences to make a
sentence. The semantic value of such a hybrid connective,
on this view, is no relation but what might be called a
hybrid connector, something which resembles a relation
at one end only.
One reason for thinking that instances of (1) are not
simply special cases of (2) may be brought out by considering a possible analogy with the structure of intentions.
For Sam to want, intend (will, wollen) to smoke may seem
at first glance to amount to nothing more than that Sam
wants or intends that he himself smokes. But this intro­
170

