But even putting that aside, is it true that any player of g with aim α
has α as their own personal aim or goal? If it is, then anyone who doesn’t
adopt α as their aim cannot be genuinely playing g. This claim strikes me
as quite implausible. If all competitive games have winning as a constitutive
aim in the sense at issue, then playing those games non-competitively is impossible or conceptually incoherent. This does not seem right. It certainly
doesn’t seem to comport with our ordinary ways of thinking and talking
about games. If I go out to play tennis with you but we end up just hitting
around without playing any points, there is nothing at all wrong with reporting my activity as having played tennis. If I’m trying to throw a game of
Tic-tac-toe because my nephew hates losing so much, there’s nothing at all
wrong with describing what I’m/we’re doing as playing Tic-tac-toe. Moreover, many games have fairly specific conditions that a player must meet in
order to win. It’s difficult to see how the fact that a player is not trying to
achieve exactly those specific conditions leaves them doing something else
entirely. Imagine someone confused about the victory conditions of some
game (they think the point of the game is α∗ rather than α). It seems to
me that with a bit of luck this sort of person can end up winning the game
despite not having adopted the aim of the game as their own personal aim.
But how can they have won the game if they weren’t playing it?
I am not alone in concern or dissent here. The claim that one can only
count as playing some game if one has adopted the point of that game as
one’s own personal aim is not without controversy.11 Defenders typically dig
in with claims that even when a player is trying to lose the game, there is
still some sense (or some sense) in which they are trying to win, or perhaps
that they are, in cases like that, playing a subtly different game (e.g. Shwar
rather than War). Neither response strikes me as very plausible.
If I’m right, then it’s difficult to see what insight is to be gleaned about
the teleological structure of inquiry by looking to games and game-playing.12
Inquiring is not similar to playing a game in the ways that would make the
fact that games have a conventionally determined point/constitutive aim
relevant — inquiring is not an artifactual practice in the way that playing
a game of Tic-tac-toe or War is. Further, the claim that some game g’s
having a constitutive aim α implies that anyone playing g has α as their
own personal aim looks false. And so the analogy with games is unhelpful
either way. Of course, this doesn’t mean that inquirers don’t have personal
aims in every case. It only means that an argument that they do that goes
11
A few dissenters: Williamson (2000), McHugh and Way (2018), Kelp and Simion
(2020), Kelp (2021), and Nguyen (2019). The latter also includes a nice, in-depth account
of the complex aims of game players.
12
See Rowbottom (2014) for concerns about the games analogy with respect to ‘the aim
of science’.

7

