So given that inquiring is intentional, it’s goal-directed in some sense.
That said, many actions that can be intentionally done can also be accidentally done, e.g. stepping on a bug, turning on the tv, eating meat. But can
we inquire accidentally? Can we engage in the activity of inquiring without
at all meaning to? Like knocking over a lamp in a dark room? I suspect
not.22 But if there is no accidental inquiry then we should say that inquiring is necessarily intentional and with that that every inquirer is acting with
some aim or engaging in a kind of goal-directed activity. And I think we can
say at least this much about those aims: they include aims to inquire — all
inquirers are trying to inquire.23
This is all to say that a personal answer to the General Question seems
plausible to me. And it seems plausible to me in part because a certain kind
of answer to a personalized version of the Specific Question seems plausible
to me, viz. that all inquirers are trying to inquire. But that sort of answer
to the Specific Question is not much like the ones typically given. The
claim that all inquirers (qua inquirers) are trying to inquire is obviously an
extremely general answer to the question of what all inquirers qua inquirers
are trying to do (as I hope is clear it’s not trivial though). But, as I’ll argue,
if we say that ‘aim of inquiry’ talk is best thought of as talk about the aims
of all inquirers then the less general sorts of answers to the Specific Question,
the ones we’re more familiar with, lose plausibility.
The Specific Question asks, What is the aim of inquiry? And these are
the sorts of answers typically given: knowledge, understanding, truth/true
belief, certainty, epistemic improvement, settled opinion, etc. Given that
we’re considering a personal aim now, the Specific Question changes shape
a little bit. Now we should think of it as asking: What goals do all inquirers
qua inquirers have? Or: What is it that all inquirers qua inquirers are trying
to do? One thing worth pointing out right away is that strictly speaking the
typical answers to the original Specific Question do not answer our new,
‘personalized’ Specific Question. ‘Knowledge’ and ‘true belief’ (etc.) are not
22

When Davidson alerted the prowler by turning on the light, his action was intentional
under one description (‘turning on the light’) and unintentional under another (‘alerting
the prowler’). He meant to do one of those things but not the other; he did one of those
things on purpose, the other by accident (see Davidson (1963) for discussion). One way
to flesh out my thought about the impossibility of accidental inquiry in this paragraph is
along these Davidsonian lines: There are no cases in which S ϕs and that ϕ-ing counts as
S’s inquiring, but it only counts as such accidentally. None of this is to say that we might
not learn without meaning to or even figure something out accidentally. It’s rather to say
that we don’t engage in the activity of inquiring accidentally.
23
I am using ‘trying to ϕ’ and ‘intending to ϕ’ (and ‘aiming to ϕ’) interchangeably here.
These are obviously closely related notions but also may well come apart in various ways.
See Holguı́n and Lederman (2022) for some recent discussion of trying and its relation to
this family of other intentional notions. For our purposes it’s not essential to keep them
apart.

15

