Synthese (2022) 200:60

Page 9 of 19 609

one’s actions and beliefs, namely which should guide which credence one might give
to one’s belief in a theory. Here is a telling quote by Schiller—who also belongs to
this first strand of pragmatism that urges us to accept what works—in which he talks
about the utility of a common-sense realism:
[Realism] manifestly is a theory of very great pragmatic value. In ordinary life
we all assume that we live in an ‘external’ world, which is ‘independent’ of us
… And it would be a great calamity if any philosophy should feel it its duty
to upset this assumption. For it works splendidly … for almost every purpose.
(1907, p. 459)
If my arguments work, then this would also hold true for the belief that truth is correspondence, at least for some domains of discourse, and therefore there would be
a general pragmatic value to aiming for correspondence. The pragmatic value of
believing truth to be correspondence is not incidental, but it is generally advantageous to have this belief in place to safeguard ourselves from stubbornness, so pragmatists like Schiller or James could not treat it as a useful fiction.
The reader might object that surely any serious form of pragmatism must be able
to account for the distinction between a belief being generally useful and a belief
being true. Luckily, the second strand of pragmatism manages to recover a more
robust notion of useful fictions. Christopher Hookway notes that, whereas the Jamesian strand of pragmatism centers its conception of truth around notions such as usefulness, the Peircean strand of pragmatism centers its conception of truth around
epistemic notions, like ‘knowledge’, ‘evidence’, ‘warrant’, and ‘inquiry’. (Hookway,
2007) Thus, we should not be inclined to take a belief to be correct if there would
merely be a prudential value to doing so; the belief would have to be of epistemic
value, i.e., it would have to be beneficial for our inquiry. It is only when a belief is
required in order for our inquiry to be carried out in the way in which we think it
ought, that we must take this belief to be true, rather than merely a useful fiction.
Such beliefs are what Peirce calls “regulative assumptions”, i.e., something “that we
have to assume [is] true if we are to carry on in the way it seems that we must carry
on.” (Misak, 2013, p. 28).
However, once again, this would not be enough to treat correspondence as merely
a useful fiction, because I have shown above that the incorporation of the belief in
correspondence into some of our practices would also be distinctly useful for our
inquiry, e.g., it can help the overconfident scientist to derive a more accurate credence for their theoretical beliefs and consequently to not overlook rival theories.
Therefore, for some discursive practices, believing truth to be correspondence would
be epistemically beneficial. It could indeed be called a regulative assumption for
science: if we are to carry out our scientific inquiry in the way we think it should be
carried out, then we must take this inquiry to aim for correspondence.
I have now shown that the usual versions of pragmatism cannot take the belief
in correspondence to be a useful fiction, but, as one of my reviewers pointed out, I
am currently leaving open the possibility that another version of pragmatism will be
developed, or that unbeknownst to me it already exists, which does have the resources
for treating correspondence as a useful fiction. Therefore, some more general reflec-

13

