Robert M. Anderson, Jr.
Is there a nest of paradoxes concealed in this aphoristic? Consider a
second set of statements set more in the "material" mode.
What is, is.
What is known and what knows is part of what is.
WTiat is, determines what is known and what knows.
When a person says what is, his saying of what is, is part of what is.
What is, determines what it is to say what is.
What is, says what is.
I am using these chants to emphasize the bizarreness of the idea of
something defining its own nature.
Let's take a world view and see how these maxims work within it.
For simplicity, let's take the Newtonian materialist cosmology. According to this view, there are atoms and the void and the atoms obey Newton's laws. I have already said how truth, meaning, and knowledge might
be worked out within this cosmology, but what of the cosmology itself?
The cosmology must be certain collections of atoms. It must consist
of configurations of atoms in people's brains, of certain other configurations similar in structure on paper, and of others in the memory banks
of computers. If this is the cosmology, how does it say what there is in
the universe? It does so by bearing a structural resemblance to the rest
of the universe.20 It postulates structures similar to its own to exist in
the universe. The cosmology is a part of the universe miming the universe. It mimes the universe by following and matching the movements
of the universe. Its structure unfolds as similar to the structure of the universe. But if this is how the cosmology can say what exists in the universe,
how does it say something about what itself is? How can it bear a structural resemblance to itself? (Perhaps the cosmology's macrostructure, e.g.,
marks on paper, can bear a structural resemblance to its microstructure,
atomic composition.) How can it mime itself? It simply is itself so how
can it bear a resemblance to itself or mime itself? How then can it define
its own nature?
We are confronted by a dilemma. Either we try to understand the
world (i.e., do philosophy) without reference to a presuppositional
frame or cosmology (i.e., try to develop an epistemology without refer80
G. Maxwell, "Theories, Perception, and Structural Realism," in R. G. Colodny,
ed., The Nature and Function of Scientific Theories (Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1970), p. 17.

538

