PARADOXES OF COSMOLOGICAL SELF-REFERENCE

domain of overlap?" A critical experiment that would simultaneously
refute one of two competing theories and confirm the other is clearly
impossible. For example, an experiment that would decide between
Newtonian and Einsteinian theory is impossible (among other reasons)
because the instruments and other entities involved in the crucial observations are, in the Newtonian theory, three-dimensional spatial solids
which endure through time, whereas in the Einsteinian account, they
are four-dimensional invariants in space-time.
Although I am in agreement generally with Feyerabend's approach to
the philosophy of science, it seems that in his presentation of his account of theories, he has made an important error. This is his use of
"meaning" as a metatheoretical term. He is not alone in making this
mistake, however, since the other "radical meaning variance theorists"
also make it. And it is further magnified by the critics9 of the view
fastening on the arguments which turn on how meaning is construed.
This is no surprise, considering present-day fashion of assimilating philosophy to linguistic analysis and the philosophy of language.
The point I wish to make is that meaning is as much a process occurring in the world as is experience. Meaning has to do with the operation of living brains in their biological and extrabiological environments.
A highly simplified kind of meaning is present in coding operations.
For example, some general purpose computers must be programmed
through a set of twelve binary switches which may be in either the up
or the down position.10 This makes it necessary to communicate with
the computer with sequences of

DUUDDDUDUDDU
UUDDDUDDDUDD
To avoid having to memorize long lists of binary numbers, programmers developed a code. They divided the twelve switches into sets of
three and labeled the up position with an integer in the order 4-2-1.
When two or three switches are up, the sum is represented. Thus
0 means DDD
1 means DDU
* The critics I have specifically in mind are Shapere, Kordig, and P. Achinstein,
"On the Meaning of Scientific Terms/' Journal of Philosophy, 61 (1964), 497-509.
10
K. H. Pribram, Languages of the Brain (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
1971), p. 67.

533

