374

William L. Rowe

cause of your making that decision? According
to Locke and Collins, the cause of that act of will
is your

desires,

judgments,

and

the circum-

stances that prevailed just prior to that decision.
Given your desires and judgments at the time,
and given the circumstances that prevailed, it
was impossible for you not to will as you did.

necessity and freedom are really inconsistent
with one another do not disagree with the necessitarians concerning the consistency of Lockean
freedom with the causal necessity of our actions
and acts of will. What they reject is the whole
notion of Lockean freedom. Before we state their
conception of freedom, however, we had best

And given the desires, judgments, circumstances,

consider what their objections are to the Lockean

and the act of will, it was impossible for you not

idea of freedom.’

to act as you did. Now this impossibility of willing and acting otherwise does not conflict with
Lockean freedom. For Lockean freedom does not
require that given the causes, we somehow could
have acted differently. All it requires is that if we
had decided or willed differently then we could
have acted differently. Indeed, Locke is careful to
note that the absolute determination of the will
or preference of the mind does not preclude
freedom so far as the action flowing from the
will or preference of the mind is concerned. He
remarks:

But though the preference of the Mind be
always determined ...; yet the Person who
has the power, in which alone consists liberty
to act, or not to act, according to such preference, is nevertheless free; such determination

abridges not that Power.

He that has his

Chains

the Prison

knocked

off, and

doors

set open to him, is perfectly at liberty, because
he may either go or stay as he best likes;
though his preference be determined to stay
by the darkness of the Night, or illness of the
Weather, or want of other Lodging. He ceases

not to be free; though that which at that time
appears to him the greater Good absolutely
determines his preference, and makes him stay

in his Prison.*
Let us call those who believe both that we
have Lockean freedom and that our actions and

acts of will are subject to causal necessity,
‘necessitarians.’ It is likely that Locke was a

Lockean freedom, as we saw, exists solely at

the level of action: you are free with respect to
some action provided that you have the power to
do the act if you will to do it, and have the power

not to do it if you will not to do it. But what
about the will? What if you don’t have the power
to will the action, or don’t have the power not to
will it? To see the difficulty here, let’s return to

our example where you are sitting down, someone asks you get up and walk over to the window
to see what is happening outside, but you are
quite satisfied where you are and choose to
remain sitting. We earlier supposed that I had
injected you with a powerful drug so that you
can’t move your legs. Here Locke would say that
you don’t sit freely, since it was not in your
power to do otherwise if you had willed otherwise—say, to get up and walk to the window.
But let’s now suppose that instead of paralyzing
your legs I had hooked up a machine to your
brain so that I can and do cause you to will to sit,
thus depriving you of the capacity to will to do
otherwise. It’s still true that you have the power
to get up and walk if you should will to do so—I
haven't taken away your physical capacity to
walk, as I did when I paralyzed your legs. Here
the problem is that you can’t will to do anything
other than sit. In this case, it seems clear that you

sit of necessity, not freely. You can’t do otherwise than sit, not because you lack the power to
get up and walk if you should manage to choose
to do that, but because you lack the power to
choose to get up and walk. On Locke’s account of

necessitarian; Hobbes and Collins most certainly

freedom, however, it remains true that you sit
freely and not of necessity. And this being so, we

were. Those who, like Clarke and Reid, hold that

must conclude that Locke’s account of freedom

