670 Pierre Duhem
light consists in simple periodic vibrations, that
these vibrations are normal to the light ray, that
at each point the mean kinetic energy of the
vibratory motion is a measure of the intensity of
light, that the more or less complete attack of
the gelatine coating on a photographic plate
indicates the various degrees of this intensity. By
joining these propositions, and many others that
would take too long to enumerate, to Neumann’s
proposition, Wiener was able to formulate a
forecast and establish that the experiment belied
it. If he attributed this solely to Neumann’s
proposition, if it alone bears the responsibility
for the error this negative result has put in
evidence, then Wiener was taking all the other
propositions he invoked as beyond doubt. But
this assurance is not imposed as a matter of
logical necessity; nothing stops us from taking
Neumann’s proposition as accurate and shifting
the weight of the experimental contradiction to
some other proposition of the commonly
accepted optics; as H. Poincaré has shown, we
can very easily rescue Neumann’s hypothesis
from the grip of Wiener’s experiment on
the condition that we abandon in exchange the
hypothesis which takes the mean kinetic energy
as the measure of the light intensity; we may,
without being contradicted by the experiment,
let the vibration be parallel to the plane of polarization, provided that we measure the light
intensity by the mean potential energy of the
medium deforming; the vibratory motion.
These principles are so important that it will
be useful to apply them to another example;
again we choose an experiment regarded as one
of the most decisive ones in optics.
We know that Newton conceived the emission theory for optical phenomena. The emission theory supposes light to be formed of
extremely thin projectiles, thrown out with very
great speed by the sun and other sources of
light; these projectiles penetrate all transparent
bodies; on account of the various parts of the

media through which they move, they undergo
attractions and repulsions; when the distance
separating the acting particles is very small these
actions are very powerful, and they vanish when
the masses between which they act are appreciably far from each other. These essential hypotheses joined to several others, which we pass over
without mention, lead to the formulation of a
complete theory of reflection and refraction of
light; in particular, they imply the following
proposition: The index of refraction of light
passing from one medium into another is equal
to the velocity of the light projectile within the
medium it penetrates, divided by the velocity of
the same projectile in the medium it leaves
behind.
This is the proposition that Arago chose in
order to show that the theory of emission is in
contradiction with the facts. From this proposition a second follows: Light travels faster in
water than in air. Now Arago had indicated an
appropriate procedure for comparing the
velocity of light in air with the velocity of light
in water; the procedure, it is true, was inapplicable, but Foucault modified the experiment in
such a way that it could be carried out; he found
that the light was propagated less rapidly in
water than in air. We may conclude from this,
with Foucault, that the system of emission is
incompatible with the facts.
I say the system of emission and not the hypothesis of emission; in fact, what the experiment
declares stained with error is the whole group of
propositions accepted by Newton, and after him
by Laplace and Biot, that is, the whole theory
from which we deduce the relation between the
index of refraction and the velocity of light in
various media. But in condemning this system
as a whole by declaring it stained with error, the
experiment does not tell us where the error lies.
Is it in the fundamental hypothesis that light
consists in projectiles thrown out with great
speed by luminous bodies? Is it in some other

