234

Parmenides and David Lewis

of time.) Therefore they are on neither side of a
dispute about whether or not persisting things
are divisible into temporal parts. They understand neither the affirmation nor the denial.
They are like the people — fictional, I hope —
who say that the whole of the long road is in
their little village, for not one single lane of it is

missing. Meaning less than others do by ‘part’,
since they omit parts cut crosswise, they also
mean less than others do by ‘whole’. They say
the ‘whole’ road is in the village; by which they
mean that every ‘part’ is; but by that, they only
mean that every part cut lengthwise is. Divide the
road into its least lengthwise parts; they cannot
even raise the question whether those are in
the village wholly or only partly. For that is a
question about crosswise parts, and the concept
of a crosswise part is what they lack. Perhaps
‘crosswise part’ really does sound to them like a
blatant contradiction. Or perhaps it seems to
them

that they understand

it, but the village

means

that,

somehow,

you

can

be

bent

on

Monday and straight on Tuesday.)
First solution: contrary to what we might
think, shapes are not genuine intrinsic properties. They are disguised relations, which an
enduring thing may bear to times. One and the
same enduring thing may bear the bent-shape
relation to some times, and the straight-shape
relation to others. In itself, considered apart from
its relations to other things, it has no shape at all.
And likewise for all other seeming temporary
intrinsics; all of them must be reinterpreted
as relations that something with an absolutely
unchanging intrinsic nature bears to different
times. The solution to the problem of temporary
intrinsics

is that there

aren’t

any

temporary

intrinsics. This is simply incredible, if we are
speaking of the persistence of ordinary things.
(It might do for the endurance of entelechies or
universals.) If we know what shape is, we know
that it is a property, not a relation.

philosophers have persuaded them that really
they couldn’t, so their impression to the con-

Second solution: the only intrinsic properties
of a thing are those it has at the present moment.

trary must

be an illusion. At any rate, I have

Other times are like false stories; they are abstract

the concept of a temporal part; and for some
while I shall be addressing only those of you

representations, composed out of the materials
of the present, which represent or misrepresent
the way things are. When something has different intrinsic properties according to one of these

who share it.’
... The principal and decisive objection
against endurance, as an account of the persistence of ordinary things such as people or
puddles, is the problem of temporary intrinsics.
Persisting things change their intrinsic properties. For instance shape: when I sit, I have a bent
shape; when I stand, I have a straightened shape.
Both shapes are temporary intrinsic properties; I
have them only some of the time. How is such
change possible? I know of only three solutions.
(It is not a solution just to say how very commonplace and indubitable it is that we have
different shapes at different times. To say that is
only to insist — rightly — that it must be possible
somehow. Still less is it a solution to say it in
jargon — as it might be, that bent-on-Monday
and straight-on. Tuesday are compatible because
they are ‘time-indexed properties’ — if that just

ersatz other times, that does not mean that it, or

any part of it, or anything else, just has them —
no more so than when a man is crooked according to the Times, or honest according to the
News. This is a solution that rejects endurance;
because it rejects persistence altogether. And it is
even less credible than the first solution. In saying that there are no other times, as opposed to
false representations thereof, it goes against what
we all believe. No man, unless it be at the
moment of his execution, believes that he has no
future; still less does anyone believe that he has

no past.
Third solution: the different shapes, and the

different temporary intrinsics generally, belong
to different things. Endurance is to be rejected in
favour of perdurance. We perdure; we are made

