534

Peter Winch

the day or night. He would be just as surprised
if he were not brought into daily contact with it
as we would be if confronted by its appearance.
To him there is nothing miraculous about it.”*
The difference is not merely one of degree
of familiarity, however, although, perhaps, even
this has more importance than might at first
appear. Concepts of witchcraft and magic in our

must seek a foothold elsewhere. And while there
may well be room for the use of such critical
expressions as “superstition” and “irrational-

culture, at least since the advent of Christianity,

more detail my criticisms of Evans-Pritchard’s
approach to the Azande.
Early in this book he defines certain categories
in terms of which his descriptions of Zande
customs are couched.

have been parasitic on, and a perversion of
other orthodox concepts, both religious and,
increasingly, scientific. To take an obvious
example, you could not understand what was
involved

in conducting

a Black

Mass,

ity,” the kind of rationality with which

such

terms might be used to point a contrast remains
to be elucidated. The remarks I shall make in
Part II will have a more positive bearing on this
issue. In the rest of this part, I shall develop in

unless

are patterns

of

you were familiar with the conduct of a proper

MYSTICAL

Mass and, therefore, with the whole complex of

thought that attribute to phenomena supra-

religious ideas from which the Mass draws its
sense. Neither would you understand the
relation between these without taking account
of the fact that the Black practices are rejected as
irrational (in the sense proper to religion) in the
system of beliefs on which these practices are
thus parasitic. Perhaps a similar relation holds
between the contemporary practice of astrology
and astronomy and technology. It is impossible
to keep a discussion of the rationality of Black
Magic or of astrology within the bounds of
concepts peculiar to them; they have an essential
reference to something outside themselves. The
position is like that which Socrates, in Plato’s
Gorgias, showed to be true of the Sophists’ conception of rhetoric: namely, that it is parasitic on
rational discourse in such a way that its irrational
character can be shown in terms of this dependence. Hence, when we speak of such practices

NOTIONS

sensible qualities which, or part of which, are

not derived from observation or cannot be

logically inferred from it, and which they do not

possess.”

COMMON-SENSE

NOTIONS

attribute to phenomena only what men
observe in them or what can logically be
inferred from observation. So long as a notion
does not assert something which has not
been observed, it is not classed as mystical
even though it is mistaken on account of
incomplete
observation....
SCIENTIFIC

NOTIONS. Science has developed out of
common-sense but is far more methodical
and has better techniques of observation and
reasoning. Common sense uses experience
and rules of thumb. Science uses experiment
and rules of Logic.... Our body of scientific
knowledge and Logic are the sole arbiters of what are
mystical, common

sense, and scientific notions. Their

enables us to show that the sense is only
apparent, in terms which are culturally relevant.
It is evident that our relation to Zande magic is

judgments are never absolute. RITUAL
BEHAVIOUR. Any behaviour that is accounted
for by mystical notions. There is no objective
nexus between the behaviour and the event
it is intended to cause. Such behaviour is
usually intelligible to us only when we
know the mystical notions associated with
it. EMPIRICAL BEHAVIOUR. Any behaviour
that is accounted for by common-sense

quite different. If we wish to understand it, we

notions.'°

as “superstitious,”

“illusory,”

“irrational,” we

have the weight of our culture behind us; and
this is not just a matter of being on the side of
the big battalions,

because

those

beliefs

and

practices belong to, and derive such sense as
they seem to have, from that same culture. This

