564 William C.Thompson and Edward L. Schumann
where the other evidence in the case is weak and
therefore the prior probability of guilt is low.
Suppose, for example, that one initially estimates
the suspect’s probability of guilt to be only .20,
but then receives additional evidence showing
that the defendant and perpetrator match on a
blood type found in 10% of the population.
According to Bayes’ theorem, this new evidence
should increase one’s subjective probability of
guilt to .71, not .90.3
There is also anecdotal evidence for a second
error, which we first heard voiced by a criminal
defense attorney and therefore call the Defense
Attorney’s Fallacy. Victims of this fallacy assume
associative evidence is irrelevant, regardless of
the rarity of the “matching” characteristic. They
reason that associative evidence is irrelevant
because it shows, at best, that the defendant and
perpetrator are both members of the same large
group. Suppose, for example, that the defendant
and perpetrator share a blood type possessed by
only 1% of the population. Victims of the fallacy
reason that in a city of 1 million there would be
approximately 10,000 people with this blood
type. They conclude there is little if any relevance
in the fact that the defendant and perpetrator
both belong to such a large group. What this
reasoning fails to take into account, of course, is
that the great majority of people with the relevant blood type are not suspects in the case at
hand. The associative evidence drastically
narrows the group of people who are or could
have been suspects, while failing to exclude the
defendant, and is therefore highly probative, as a
Bayesian analysis shows. The Defense Attorney’s
Fallacy is not limited to defense attorneys.
Several appellate justices also appear to
be victims of this fallacy (See, e.g., People v.
Robinson, 1970). If defense attorneys and
appellate justices fall victim to this fallacy, it is
quite possible that some jurors do as well,
thereby giving less weight to associative evidence
than it warrants.

Whether people fall victim to the Prosecutor’s
Fallacy, the Defense Attorney’s Fallacy, or neither
may depend on the manner in which incidence
rate statistics are presented and explained. In criminal trials, forensic experts often present information about incidence rates in terms of the
conditional probability the defendant would have
a particular characteristic if he were innocent (Jonakait,
1983). Where 1% of the population possess a
blood type shared by the defendant and perpetrator, for example, experts often present only the
conclusory statement that there is one chance in
100 that the defendant would have this blood type
if he were innocent. This type of testimony seems
especially likely to lead jurors to commit the
Prosecutor’s Fallacy. On the other hand, a defense
tactic used in some actual cases is to point out that,
notwithstanding its low incidence rate, the characteristic shared by the defendant and perpetrator
is also possessed by thousands of other individuals. Where 1% of the population possess a blood
type shared by the defendant and perpetrator, for
example, the expert might be forced to admit
during cross examination that in a city of one
million people, approximately 10,000 individuals
would have the “rare” blood type. Statements of
this type may reduce the tendency toward the
Prosecutor’s Fallacy but induce more errors
consistent with the Defense Attorney’s Fallacy.
To test these hypotheses, Experiment 1 had
subjects estimate the likelihood a criminal suspect
was guilty based, in part, on statistical evidence
concerning the incidence rate of a characteristic
shared by the defendant and perpetrator. The part
of the evidence concerning the incidence rates was
presented in two different ways. In one condition
the forensic expert presented only the conditional
probability that an innocent person would have the
“matching” characteristic. In a second condition
the expert stated the percentage of the population
who possess the relevant characteristic and the
approximate number of people who possess this
characteristic in the city where the crime occurred.

