64

Philosophy of Physics

of (at least seemingly) deterministic processes. This appears to be a particular
problem with respect to causation, which in its most paradigmatic instances
(e.g., physical impact) seems very clearly to be deterministic. That is, even
a vanishingly small probability of, say, Newton’s Cradle not resulting in an
impact on the last pendulum in the sequence would strongly contradict our
intuitions about the world.
An alternative approach to a straightforward physical reduction would be to
attempt a reduction of both the statistical second law and the constitutingprocesses of our experience of time to a third, even more fundamental quantity.
Sklar (1993, pp. 387–411) reviews several such attempts, including a reduction
to information and information exchanges. This latter approach was popular in
the second half of the twentieth century (e.g., Brillouin, 1951; Bennett, 1973;
1982). However, the information-theoretic approach to entropy is currently
more controversially debated (for arguments against, see, e.g.: Earman &
Norton 1998; 1999; Norton, 2005; for arguments for: Bub, 2001. For our
purposes, it is sufﬁcient to note that no full reduction to any third quantity has
yet been achieved. Therefore, the explanatory potential of the Local Statistical
Arrow of Time remains exactly this: a potentiality of offering an explanation
that would avoid making assumptions about the nature of the universe (in
contrast to the Universal Statistical Arrow of Time, Section 5.2), but for
which currently no straightforward route to formalisation has been identiﬁed.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009217347 Published online by Cambridge University Press

5.4 Conclusion
It is easily apparent that the derivation of the two Statistical Arrows of Time from
the statistical second law requires the introduction of more additional assumptions than does the derivation of the Empirical Arrow of Time. The Global
Statistical Arrow of Time requires two additional assumptions (Section 5.2):
the Cosmic Entropy Assumption and the Past Hypothesis. The Local Statistical
Arrow of Time requires one additional assumption: the Local Reduction
Assumption (Section 5.3). Carrying over from the prior derivation of the
statistical second law is the Equal Accessibility Assumption (Section 4.3).
Therefore, the validity of the Statistical Arrows of Time depends on
a comparatively large number of contingencies. Furthermore, as demonstrated
in the discussions of each assumption above, the assumptions are not trivially
fulﬁlled and decisions about their veracity depend on advances on other, highly
contested, questions in science and philosophy: in the case of the Cosmic Entropy
Assumption and the Past Hypothesis on advances in our understanding of the
universe’s cosmological development; in the case of the Local Reduction
Assumption on a better understanding of how atomic and molecular phenomena

