ARTIFACT, CAUSE AND GENIC SELECTION

173

Are there real cases of genic selection? A dominant lethal-a gene
which causes the individual to die regardless of the context in which it
occurs-would be selected against. And selection for or against a phenotypic trait controlled by a single locus having two alleles might also be
describable in terms of genic selection, provided that the heterozygote is
intermediate in fitness between the two homozygotes. In addition, meiotic
drive, such as is found in the house mouse Mus musculus, similarly seems

to involve genic selection (Lewontin and Dunn 1960). Among heterozygote males, the proportion of t-alleles in the sperm pool is greater than

1/2. Chromosomes with the t-allele have enhanced chances of representation in the gamete pool, and this directional effect seems to hold true
regardless of what other genes are present at other loci.?1 At this level,
but not at the others at which the t-allele affects the population, it is
appropriate to talk about genic selection.
We so far have construed genic selection in terms of the way that hav-

ing or lacking a gene can affect the reproductive chances of organisms.
But there is another possibility-namely, that genes differentially prolif-

erate even though they have no effect on the phenotypes of organisms.
A considerable quantity of DNA has no known function; Orgel and Crick

(1980) and Doolittle and Sapienza (1980) have suggest that this DNA
may in fact be "junk". Such "selfish DNA", as they call it, could nonetheless undergo a selection process, provided that some segments are
better replicators than others. Although these authors associate their ideas

with Dawkins' selfish gene, their conception is far more restrictive. For
Dawkins, all selection is genic selection, whereas for these authors, selfish DNA is possible only when the differential replication of genes is
not exhaustively accounted for by the differential reproductive success
of organisms.
Standard ways of understanding natural selection rule out rather than

substantiate the operation of genic selection. It is often supposed that
much of natural selection is stabilizing selection, in which an intermediate

phenotype is optimal (e.g., birth weight in human beings). Although the
exact genetic bases of such phenotypes are frequently unknown, biologists often model this selection process as follows. It is hypothesized that
the phenotypic value is a monotone increasing function of the number of
"plus alleles" found at a number of loci. Whether selection favors the

presence of plus genes at one locus depends on how many such genes
exist at other loci. Although this model does not view heterozygote su-

"?Genes at other loci which modify the intensity of segregator distortion are known to
exist in Drosophila; the situation in the house mouse is not well understood. Note that the
existence of such modifiers is consistent with genic selection, as long as they do not affect

the direction of selection.

This content downloaded from
132.248.28.19 on Thu, 06 Oct 2022 17:43:47 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

