VI. Reprise

But notice the crucial "invisible hand" factor: Swapping the reprint for the preprint assumes
that at some point there is a quality-control stage, with what is before it being "pre" and
what is after it being "post." The invisible hand is being provided by the PAPER literature
right now. THIS is the (seeming) weak point at which the divide-and-conquer strategy will
be aimed, squarely. You have to make sure you are fore-armed against it, so the whole
project doesn't get locked into the anarchy issue.
sh> I have no animus against paper publishers. It's natural for them to do
sh> whatever they can to preserve the status quo, or something close to it.
pg> i didn't use to, one seems to be growing on me over past few years.
sh> But necessity is the mother of invention, and my subversive
sh> proposal would awaken their creative survival skills.
pg> you may be giving them too much credit. there seem very few
pg> visionaries in that industry, and their investment in the
pg> status quo leaves the rest blinded.
They're not facing necessity yet (though your preprint archive is what is bringing them the
closest to the brink so far -- and wide following of my subversive proposal would simply
generalize your effect across disciplines; my electronic journal is no threat till it has hundreds
of counterparts, across disciplines). So far 99.99% of the cards are still paper, and they are in
their hands. Necessity (and the creativity it gives birth to) will only intervene when those
cards really begin to fall; until then, vision will be limited, and delaying the inevitable will be
the best strategy for paper publishers.
sh> if, as I say,
sh> publishers wish to survive in ESOTERIC publication, they will have to
sh> change from a trade to a subsidy model for recovering the substantially
sh> lower true costs of electronic-ONLY publication).
pg> my current guess (hope?) is that the big publishing companies will
pg> ultimately drop out of the esoteric market, since the bottom line will not
pg> be so interesting to them (currently libraries spend over $10,000 / year on
pg> subscriptions to single journals such as nuclear physics b -- those will be the
pg> the first to go). professional societies, on the other hand, are likely
pg> to survive and still may be of use. my own professional society (aps) is
pg> coming to terms with a fait accompli, and is now sponsoring a major
pg> meeting on my home turf with what appears to be in principle
pg> a forward-looking agenda.
But since virtually all of our intellectual goods are currently being carried by the paper
flotilla it is in ALL of our best interests (not just publishers') to make sure that the transition
period does not turn into anarchy. Worst scenario: Paper publishers decide to cut their
losses instead of restructuring, and simply pull out of esoteric publication. Do you think the
editorial offices of all those esoteric journals could simply go electronic overnight? In fact,
paper journal editorial offices (and paper journal editors) for the most part wear the same
paleolithic blinkers as paper publishers.
No, the transition process should be a (preferably speedy but) graded one, a peaceful one,

4 of 6

1/23/07 10:26 AM

