Glossary

called "Right Pages, the Medical School at the University of California, and several publishers of
journals in radiology.
SCI - Science Citation Index. Produced by the Institute for Scientific Information, SCI indices show the
pattern of citations of scientific journal articles.
SGML - Standard Generalized Markup Language. SGML is both a language and an ISO standard for
describing information embedded within a document. HyperText Markup Language (HTML) is based
on the SGML standard.
SIAM - Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA.
SLAC - Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University. SLAC is the site of an extensive
archive of preprints for high energy physics.
Software - A program or set of instructions that controls the operation of a computer. Distinguished
from the actual hardware of the computer.
src.doc.ic.ac.uk - Address for the Gopher server at the Department of Computing, Imperial College,
London, UK.
TeX - A powerful text formatting program initially written by Donald Knuth. Widely used by computer
scientists, mathematicians, and physicists.
TIFF - Tagged Image File Format. A file format commonly used for digital scanned images. Images
saved in TIFF format can be used on most computers. Developed by Aldus and Microsoft.
TULIP - The University LIcensing Program. TULIP is a cooperative research project testing system for
networked delivery and use of journals. Objectives include determining technical feasibility, developing
organizational and economic models, and studying user behavior. For testing purposes, 42 materials
science and engineering journals published by Elsevier and Pergamon are being used.
UNESCO - United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, whose headquarters is in
Paris, France.
URL - Uniform Resource Locator. A URL is the "address" for something made available through the
World Wide Web. A URL consists of the access method, server name, directory, and file name.
Although the URL was developed for WWW, it has become widely used to describe the location of files
which may be accessed by other techniques.
USENET - An informal system of electronic bulletin boards or discussion groups commonly
distributed over the Internet. USENET predates the Internet, although today most USENET material is
distributed over the Internet.
Veronica - Veronica is a program to search an index to all Gopher server titles in the world. The
program was developed at the University of Nevada. The initials stand for Very Easy Rodent-Oriented
Net-wide Index to Computerized Archives.
VT100 - Originally, a video display terminal manufactured by the Digital Equipment Corporation. It is
now the most commonly supported plain text terminal type used for network connections.
WAIS - Wide Area Information Servers. A software program originally developed by Thinking
Machines Co. which permits the very rapid search of extensive indexes to find text in large documents.
World-Wide Web (WWW) - A hypertext system of cross-linked data sources, which permits easy
5 of 6

1/23/07 10:36 AM

