John Langshaw Austin

submerged stick is bent from the case of the alcoholic person who judges
that pink rats are visible. But having distinguished the cases in that way,
we are liable to become open to two new questions. First, should we allow
that the judgment in the delusory case is based on sensory experience?
Perhaps, for example, some cases of delusion involve dysfunction in the
systems responsible for perceptual judgment of a sort that give rise to
perceptual judgments in the absence of any sense-experiential basis for
those judgments. Second, even if we allow that a particular delusory
judgment is based upon sensory experience, should we allow that it
involves sensory experience of anything other than elements that are
present in the deluded subject’s environment? Perhaps some cases of
delusion involve dysfunctional judgmental responses to what is seen or
heard. For example, an alcoholic subject judgment that a pink rat is visible
might be a disordered response to an experience of a shadow. Unless we
are forced to answer both questions affirmatively, we lack the basis for an
argument that the deluded subject experiences anything distinct from the
ordinary things and features that they can see, hear, etc.
Austin doesn’t suggest that there could be no grounds for giving
affirmative answers to either of those questions. Moreover, it is very
plausible that such grounds can be provided. It is plausible, for example,
that there are distinctive sensory experiences involved in what we call
seeing double, or seeing afterimages, that cannot be explained simply by
appeal to what is present in subjects’ environments. And it is plausible that
genuine sensory hallucinations are possible—indeed, it is plausible that
such hallucinations might figure in explaining the alcoholic person’s
judgment. However, although the style of response just considered is
indecisive against such additional developments of the argument, the
resources that it deploys will surely figure in serious engagement with
those developments. Austin sketches an approach to issues raised by such
experiences by attempting to give an account of the reports we are inclined
to make in such cases—“I see two pieces of paper”, “I see pink rats”.

46

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

