considered the father of science for his insistence that the material world is
all that there is. His ideas didn’t take strong hold, as for most of its history
Western thought was under the influence of a combination of Platonism and
Christianity, both of which asserted the existence of some kind of nonphysical realm, more real than the world of perception. Even during the
Enlightenment, when naturalism became more prominent, a residual
separation of humanity and nature, mind and matter, persisted. Even now
Westerners who accept a naturalistic world view find themselves
distinguishing humanity and nature, mind and body, far more sharply than
those in China or Japan.
This ‘dualism’ is often taken to be a distinctive feature of Western
philosophy. If so, then it would be yet another mistaken kind of dualism to
think that there is one alternative to it, in the Far East. Elsewhere in the
world there is yet another way of thinking, which accepts a plurality of
substances, of minds, bodies and spirits, yet which avoids sharp dualism.
‘The distinction between the material and the spiritual has no place in
African thinking,’ say Lebisa J. Teffo and Abraham P. J. Roux.29 Instead,
there is a kind of vitalism in which everything is seen to be alive; perhaps
even a panpsychism in which everything is conscious. This would also seem
to be true of most oral philosophies. ‘What we have in common with most of
the world is that we don’t separate out the spiritual from the physical,’ the
Māori Hirini Kaa told me. ‘I think that’s what makes Europe different. You’re
the ones who have separated it out, you’re the ones who are abnormal.’
This separation is at the root of one of the most enduring puzzles in
Western philosophy, the ‘mind-body problem’: how can inert matter give rise
to conscious thought and subjective experience? Galen Strawson, one of the
most eminent contributors to the contemporary debate, sees panpsychism
as the most credible solution on the table.30 The idea that everything has at
least a spark of mind could yet gain traction in Western philosophy.
For all its dominance in the East, naturalism is practically unheard of in
classical Indian philosophy. Of the heterodox and orthodox schools, only
Cārvāka embraces materialism, arguing that the four elements – earth, fire,
water and air – are ‘the original principles; from these alone, when
transformed into body, intelligence is produced. […] therefore the soul is
only the body distinguished by the attribute of intelligence, since there is no
evidence for any soul distinct from the body’.31 Cārvāka, however, is the
least influential of the six orthodox and five heterodox schools.
Dualistic thinking is a hard habit to break, but if it is ditched distinctions
assumed fundamental disappear. Take away the mind/body distinction and
you also take away the interior/exterior distinction, because there is no
matter for the immaterial mind to be housed in. Muecke told me that in

