Conclusion: The Theme Revisited

335

constrain an agent’s rational degrees of belief. Moreover, the evaluation of
conditional degrees of belief proceeds counterfactually (see Variation 12),
and via the notion of possible interventions, counterfactual considerations
play an important role in evaluating causal relations. Future work should
bring forth an integrated theory of causal induction, Bayesian learning and
conditional reasoning (e.g., building on Oaksford and Chater 2000; Pearl
2000; Douven 2016; Over 2016). Apart from theoretical pioneer work, we
see a lot of promise in experiments that investigate such connections or that
try to measure concepts such as causal strength (see Variation 6). Finally,
Bayesian models can be used to study human argumentation and the value
we assign to logically valid arguments (e. g., Eva and Hartmann 2018a; Stern
and Hartmann 2018).
Second, Bayesian confirmation is intimately related to causal and explanatory considerations (Variations 1, 6 and 7). On a theoretical level, this calls
for an extended analysis of the relationship between measures of confirmation, corroboration, causal strength and explanatory power, similar to
what Schupbach (2018) did for measures of explanatory power and posterior
probability. This should lead to a sharper demarcation of these concepts and
to a description of the conditions when the one is conducive to the other. On
an empirical level, we propose experiments that uncover correlations and
differences in judgments of explanatory power, causal strength and probability, in order to reveal the determinants of explanatory judgments and to
provide a more nuanced and descriptively appropriate view of explanatory
reasoning. Since explanation is a concept which is loaded with causal and
probabilistic connotations, such experiments strike us as highly valuable.
Colombo, Postma and Sprenger (2016) and Colombo, Bucher and Sprenger
(2017b) have already made some steps in this direction, but there is still
much work to be done (see also the survey in Sloman and Lagnado 2015).
This research could also be related to the role of simplicity in scientific reasoning: our formal analysis of simplicity in model selection (see Variation 10)
should at some point be complemented by an empirical investigation of how
simplicity considerations affect other aspects of scientific reasoning, similar
to what Lombrozo (2007) did for simplicity in explanatory judgments.
Third, the material in this book is an outstanding basis for a detailed
investigation of the scope and rationality of Inference to the Best Explanation. Not only can one assess ibe on the basis of diverse measures of
explanatory power (see Variation 7), it is also possible to relate ibe to other
argument patterns that we explicated in this book: the No Alternatives
Argument (naa, see Variation 2) and the No Miracles Argument (nma, see

