Simone de Beauvoir

29

them lack their own independent subject status. In fact, often, they have been
spurred to write as a result of the false, derogatory images of women confected
by men. Yet the proposition that Beauvoir developed clearly spoke to women of
her time, and it enabled her to develop an original account of the history of
Western ideas, elements of which have since been taken up and developed, both
by subsequent scholars and in popular culture.
Beauvoir’s aim, in the ﬁrst chapters of her work, is guided by the existentialist
assumption that human culture and values are not determined by exterior
conditions, despite the fact that material realities cannot be denied. She ﬁrst
considers biology, concluding that sexual difference is a reality, that their
biology is ‘an essential element of women’s situation’, and that the differences
between male and female bodies implies that their hold on the world differs.
Nevertheless, biology does not imply any ﬁxed destiny, nor does it explain,
according to what she says at this point, how woman has been subjugated or
why she is the Other (DS, I.1.i, 78–9; SSp, 60; SSbm, 44–5). Similarly, with
psychoanalysis, though it can provide an account of how the differences
between male and female sexual anatomy – the possession or lack of the
penis – can result in differences in the male and female subjective experience
of the self, it cannot explain why women become the Other. Nor can the Marxist
perspective, developed by Engels in The Origin of the Family, Private Property
and the State (1884), which places the development of tools and consequent rise
of private property at the heart of female subjection, really account for women’s
status as the Other. Beauvoir concludes that the phallus, the tool, and biological
strength cannot by themselves explain women’s status, arguing that they must
be integrated into the overall perspective of human existence, ‘the fundamental
project of the existent transcending itself towards being’ (DS, I.1.iii, 107–8;
SSp, 86; SSbm, 69). This she sets out to do in her chapters on history.
In these chapters, she follows the thread offered by Hegel in order to develop
an original account of the unfolding of history, which might be called a dialectic
of sex. She does not use this term, which was coined twenty-one years later by
Shulamith Firestone (Firestone, 1970). Rejecting the nineteenth-century proposal that there had been an ancient matriarchy, which had been used by Engels
to claim that, with the rise of private property, there had been a historical defeat
of women, Beauvoir asserts that the ‘world has always belonged to males’ (DS,
I.2.i, 111; SSp, 87; SSbm, 73). She then offers her ‘key to the whole mystery’, an
adaptation of Hegel’s dialectic that ‘explains’ how it is that men develop an
independent consciousness. This happens because it is in risking life that men
come to recognise that life is not the highest value but is something that can
serve greater ends (DS, I.2.i, 115; SSp, 89; SSbm, 76). Woman, she postulates, is
biologically destined to repeat life, while at the same time she recognises that
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026802 Published online by Cambridge University Press

