6.2 Ballungen and Explication

153

Mormann refers to Neurath’s picture of language as a non-Cartesian one
(Mormann 1996). By this, he means that Neurath rejects two crucial assumptions
about language made by Descartes. Specifically, Descartes believed it possible to
arrive at a final, completed language, built upon clear and distinct ideas. Neurath
rejects this as a pseudo-rationalist fantasy. Instead, he argues that the very notion of
a final language is delusional, that all language should be recognised as provisional,
and that all languages will inevitably be permeated with a degree of uncertainty.
This uncertainty comes partly from Ballungen. It ‘is the job of Ballungen to preclude
Carnap’s recourse to such clean elements. . . note that Ballungen preclude definite,
once-and-for-all fixed meanings’ (Cartwright et al. 1996, 157). But along with
this pragmatic reason for assuming the impurity of language, there is also an
epistemological reason. For Neurath, as we saw, Ballungen are also a consequence
of our inability to survey all our knowledge at once:
our experience in this is like that of a miner who at some spot of the mine raises his lamp
and spreads light, while all the rest lies in total darkness. If an adjacent part is illuminated
those parts vanish in the dark that were lit only just now. (Neurath 1921/1973, 198)

Even if we engage in a process of linguistic refinement, we cannot view our
language in its totality. Even if we deliberately intervene in language, language
still has a life of its own. Does this not render Carnapian explication a waste
of time? Why would Neurath support the pursuit of a goal that can never be
reached? Mormann contends that Carnap never fully understood or responded to
Neurath’s Ballungen; ‘For him vagueness, opacity were defects of the actually
existing language of science that “in principle” could be neglected’ (Mormann 1999,
174).
This suggestion of a fundamental rift is however a significant exaggeration. For
one, the characterisation of Carnap it relies on is wrong. Carnap doesn’t neglect
vagueness in natural language, he developed an entire methodology to alleviate
it: explication. Neurath is concerned with natural languages, those he repeatedly
reminds us we are born into and have little control over. We must ‘consider the
current plenitude of science as our base of operations’ (Neurath 1937d/1987, 138).
Ballungen are not features of constructed formal languages, but organic outgrowths
of language at work in the world. But Carnap agrees with Neurath about the
indeterminacy of natural language. That’s his entire motivation for explicating
things to begin with.
Let us step back and ask, what are Ballungen? The German term “Ballung”
means ‘congestion or concentration’ (Cartwright and Cat 1996, 82). Neurath
proposes ‘clot’ as a translation (Neurath 1944/1971, 18). Now look at Neurath’s
descriptions of them:
unprecise terms (“clusters”) occur that I best characterise by the nature of their application
(Neurath 1934/1983, 105)
complex (messy) statements of little cleanliness (Neurath 1935b/1983, 128)

Ballungen are non-deliberate assemblages, unhelpful organic linguistic conglomerations. These are not simply concepts held together by Wittgensteinean familyresemblances. Rather, these clusters seem to contain various ill-defined concepts,

