30

1 Naturalism and the Vienna Circle

And crucially, Carnap agrees with Neurath about the three epistemological
claims on which Neurath’s naturalism rests. Carnap is a confirmational holist;
‘the test applies, at bottom, not to a single hypothesis but to the whole system
of physics as a system of hypotheses’ (Carnap 1934d/2001, 318). He accepts
the reality of underdetermination, and that the adoption of any scientific theory
is therefore conventional and decision guided; ‘That hypotheses. . . nevertheless
contain a conventional element is due to the fact that the system of hypotheses is
never univocally determined by the empirical material, however rich it may be’
(Carnap 1934d/2001, 320). And Carnap is a fallibilist; ‘all rules are laid down with
the reservation that they may be altered as soon as it seems expedient’ (Carnap
1934d/2001, 320). And as a result, we can see that Carnap too accepts the primacy
of scientific practice as a consequence:
whoever desires to investigate [the language of science] must accordingly take into
consideration the language which is used in practice in the special sciences. . . [Logic of
science] can only be useful and productive in practice if it has regard to the available
empirical findings of scientific investigation (Carnap 1935, 332)

One may will still wonder about Carnap’s logic of science. Is it not a priori? And
how does it fit with Neurath’s empirical metatheory of science? These questions will
be discussed further in subsequent chapters. For now, I must simply indicate briefly
that Carnap agrees with Neurath’s rejection of the apriority of epistemology because
he agrees with Neurath’s reasons for and means of naturalising epistemology.

1.3.2 Carnap’s Approval of Neurath’s Naturalism
Carnap is a Humean empiricist like the rest of the Circle. He explicitly invokes
Hume’s fork in his delineation of the domain of meaningful scientific statements
(Carnap 1932c/1995, 61). ‘Synthetic sentences are the genuine statements about
reality’ (Carnap 1934d/2001, 179). So for him, formal studies don’t have content,
and don’t provide substantive knowledge. But these contentless analytic statements
are still legitimately scientific. The logic of science is ‘the formal structure theory of
the language of science. . . The logical syntax of the language of science’ (Carnap
1934c, 9). This is concerned only with the ‘rules of that language’ (Carnap 1934c,
9). And as he later says, ‘syntactical investigation. . . is indeed a purely mathematical
task’ (Carnap 1935, 332). Consequently, the sentences of the logic of science ‘lie
inside the boundary drawn by Hume’ (Carnap 1934a/1987, 48). So despite logic
of science being an a priori undertaking, its analyticity allows it to be consistent
with empiricism, and therefore included within unified science. The apriorism
Carnap opposes claims there to be substantive, synthetic a priori knowledge (Carnap

general economic situation, etc. . . For very many decisions, both in individual and in social life,
we need such a prediction based upon a combined knowledge of concrete facts and general laws
belonging to different branches of science’ (Carnap 1938/1991, 404).

