Beyond Uncertainty

71

awareness growth. For instance, one might anticipate becoming aware of new
artists or genres when one visits an arts festival – an example to which we shall
later return.
In this section we however foreground the more dramatic or extreme cases of
‘conscious unawareness’ and associated anticipation or openness to awareness
growth, such as the prospect of geoengineering that we introduce in Section 6.2.
We go on to propose, in Section 6.3, how to model an agent who is open to the
possibility of awareness growth, such that this may play a role in her decisionmaking. Finally, in Section 6.4, we reflect on how our model of openness to
awareness growth reveals this phenomenon to be in some ways very ordinary, more or less akin to ordinary reasoning about less-than-fully-specified
contingencies as described in any standard decision model.

6.2 Example: Solar Radiation Management
Solar radiation management (SRM), also known as solar geoengineering, has
been discussed as a most likely very efficient and effective way of combating
(and potentially even reversing) climate change. One such technique would
consist in injecting reflective aerosol particles into the stratosphere. These particles would then reflect a small amount of inbound sunlight back out into space,
thus making the planet cooler than it would otherwise be.
Although the idea behind SRM is partly inspired by the eruption of large
volcanoes that naturally blast reflective sulphate particles into the stratosphere,
nothing like the scale of SRM that would be needed to combat climate change
has ever been tried. Thus, as for instance the Solar Radiation Management Governance Initiative frankly admits, the potential ‘side effects’ of SRM are not
well understood and are in fact mostly unknown.49
SRM would thus seem to be an example where we do, and should, anticipate awareness growth, if (or when) it is seriously tried. There may be various
possible ‘side effects’ which we cannot yet articulate, but we think one of these
side effects is bound to occur if we do try SRM on the scale needed to combat climate change. So none of the possible outcomes of SRM can currently
be described in perfect detail. That is to say, we may anticipate that trying out
SRM on a global scale leads to awareness growth by refinement.
In addition (or alternatively), we may suspect there is some unknown contingency that is inconsistent with any contingency of which we are aware and that
could make solar radiation management either much more positive or much
more negative than the possible outcomes of which we are currently aware.
49

See www.srmgi.org/what-is-srm/.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 37.218.244.251, on 23 Aug 2021 at 19:48:04, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108582230

