Beyond Uncertainty

57

propositions – that the movie is a thriller and that it is a comedy – in the old
awareness context.
There is one remaining potential objection to, in particular, examples 2 and
3 that we should address before proceeding. The objection is that, in example
2, you realise that you did not, to begin with, have as much evidence as you
had thought for your partner having an affair, whereas in example 3 you realise
that you had evidence all along that the movie would be a thriller. So, in both
cases, you realise that your previous epistemic state was flawed.37
Now, we need not reject this characterisation of these examples for them to
be counterexamples to Reverse Bayesianism. After all, the reason you realise
that your previous epistemic state was flawed is that you become aware of new
contingencies that show that you either had more or else less evidence than
you thought. In the movie example you become aware of a fact that connects
what you already knew to the movie being a thriller, whereas in the surprise
party example you become aware of a new possible explanation that convinces
you that the evidence you took yourself to have for your partner’s affair wasn’t
strong. So, even though you do realise that your previous epistemic state was
flawed, you do so by becoming more aware, and this growth in awareness can
be rational without aligning with the requirements of Reverse Bayesianism.
In addition, and more generally, one might of course wonder why the kind of
conservativity that Reverse Bayesianism captures should be rationally required
when one has realised one’s previous epistemic state to be flawed.38
In sum, the examples show that Reverse Bayesianism cannot hold in full
generality, neither as a constraint on belief revision due to expansion nor as a
constraint on belief revision due to refinement. Before closing, however, we
note a different potential criticism of our analysis. It might be argued that our
examples are not illustrative of a simple learning event (a simple growth in
awareness); rather, our examples illustrate and should be expressed formally
as complex learning experiences, where first there is a growth in awareness,
and then there is a further learning event that may be represented, say, as a
Jeffrey-style or Adams-style (recall footnote 32) learning event.39 In this way,
one could argue that the awareness-growth aspect of the learning event always
satisfies Reverse Bayesianism (the new propositions are in the first instance
evidentially irrelevant to the comparison of the old basic propositions). Subsequently, however, there may be a revision of probabilities over some partition
of the possibility space, resulting in more dramatic changes to the ratios of

37

Thanks to Teru Thomas for suggesting this interpretation.
Thanks to Alan Hájek for this last point.
39 This suggestion resonates with the discussion in Hill (2010).
38

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 37.218.244.251, on 23 Aug 2021 at 19:48:04, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108582230

