41.2 • The Kidneys and Osmoregulatory Organs

LINK TO LEARNING
To learn more about the vascular system of kidneys, click through this review (http://openstax.org/l/kidneys) and the steps of
blood flow.

Tubular Reabsorption and Secretion

Tubular reabsorption occurs in the PCT part of the renal tubule. Almost all nutrients are reabsorbed, and this occurs either by
passive or active transport. Reabsorption of water and some key electrolytes are regulated and can be influenced by hormones.
Sodium (Na+) is the most abundant ion and most of it is reabsorbed by active transport and then transported to the peritubular
capillaries. Because Na+ is actively transported out of the tubule, water follows it to even out the osmotic pressure. Water is also
independently reabsorbed into the peritubular capillaries due to the presence of aquaporins, or water channels, in the PCT. This
occurs due to the low blood pressure and high osmotic pressure in the peritubular capillaries. However, every solute has a
transport maximum and the excess is not reabsorbed.
In the loop of Henle, the permeability of the membrane changes. The descending limb is permeable to water, not solutes; the
opposite is true for the ascending limb. Additionally, the loop of Henle invades the renal medulla, which is naturally high in salt
concentration and tends to absorb water from the renal tubule and concentrate the filtrate. The osmotic gradient increases as it
moves deeper into the medulla. Because two sides of the loop of Henle perform opposing functions, as illustrated in Figure 41.8,
it acts as a countercurrent multiplier. The vasa recta around it acts as the countercurrent exchanger.

VISUAL CONNECTION

Figure 41.8 The loop of Henle acts as a countercurrent multiplier that uses energy to create concentration gradients. The descending limb
is water permeable. Water flows from the filtrate to the interstitial fluid, so osmolality inside the limb increases as it descends into the renal
medulla. At the bottom, the osmolality is higher inside the loop than in the interstitial fluid. Thus, as filtrate enters the ascending limb, Na+
and Cl- ions exit through ion channels present in the cell membrane. Further up, Na+ is actively transported out of the filtrate and Clfollows. Osmolarity is given in units of milliosmoles per liter (mOsm/L).

Loop diuretics are drugs sometimes used to treat hypertension. These drugs inhibit the reabsorption of Na+ and Cl- ions by the
ascending limb of the loop of Henle. A side effect is that they increase urination. Why do you think this is the case?
By the time the filtrate reaches the DCT, most of the urine and solutes have been reabsorbed. If the body requires additional
water, all of it can be reabsorbed at this point. Further reabsorption is controlled by hormones, which will be discussed in a later
section. Excretion of wastes occurs due to lack of reabsorption combined with tubular secretion. Undesirable products like
metabolic wastes, urea, uric acid, and certain drugs, are excreted by tubular secretion. Most of the tubular secretion happens in

1181

