12.2 • Characteristics and Traits

Human Inheritance in Dominant and Recessive Patterns
Dominant Traits

Recessive Traits

Achondroplasia

Albinism

Brachydactyly

Cystic fibrosis

Huntington’s disease

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

Marfan syndrome

Galactosemia

Neurofibromatosis

Phenylketonuria

Widow’s peak

Sickle-cell anemia

Wooly hair

Tay-Sachs disease

Table 12.4
Several conventions exist for referring to genes and alleles. For the purposes of this chapter, we will abbreviate genes using the
first letter of the gene’s corresponding dominant trait. For example, violet is the dominant trait for a pea plant’s flower color, so
the flower-color gene would be abbreviated as V (note that it is customary to italicize gene designations). Furthermore, we will
use uppercase and lowercase letters to represent dominant and recessive alleles, respectively. Therefore, we would refer to the
genotype of a homozygous dominant pea plant with violet flowers as VV, a homozygous recessive pea plant with white flowers
as vv, and a heterozygous pea plant with violet flowers as Vv.

The Punnett Square Approach for a Monohybrid Cross
When fertilization occurs between two true-breeding parents that differ in only one characteristic, the process is called a
monohybrid cross, and the resulting offspring are monohybrids. Mendel performed seven monohybrid crosses involving
contrasting traits for each characteristic. On the basis of his results in F1 and F2 generations, Mendel postulated that each parent
in the monohybrid cross contributed one of two paired unit factors to each offspring, and every possible combination of unit
factors was equally likely.
To demonstrate a monohybrid cross, consider the case of true-breeding pea plants with yellow versus green pea seeds. The
dominant seed color is yellow; therefore, the parental genotypes were YY for the plants with yellow seeds and yy for the plants
with green seeds, respectively. A Punnett square, devised by the British geneticist Reginald Punnett, can be drawn that applies
the rules of probability to predict the possible outcomes of a genetic cross or mating and their expected frequencies. To prepare
a Punnett square, all possible combinations of the parental alleles are listed along the top (for one parent) and side (for the other
parent) of a grid, representing their meiotic segregation into haploid gametes. Then the combinations of egg and sperm are
made in the boxes in the table to show which alleles are combining. Each box then represents the diploid genotype of a zygote,
or fertilized egg, that could result from this mating. Because each possibility is equally likely, genotypic ratios can be
determined from a Punnett square. If the pattern of inheritance (dominant or recessive) is known, the phenotypic ratios can be
inferred as well. For a monohybrid cross of two true-breeding parents, each parent contributes one type of allele. In this case,
only one genotype is possible. All offspring are Yy and have yellow seeds (Figure 12.4).

305

