FREGEAND HILBERTON CONSISTENCY

335

One reason to suppose that Frege would have denied the existence of such an ultimate level of analysis stems from his remarks
about the "re-carvability"of thoughts (see, for example, FA ?64).
that a given thought can be
Frege holds, at least in the GrTundlagen,
expressed by two sentences neither of which is obtainable from the
other by analysis of the simple components of either. Thus, for example, the same thought can be expressed via sentences of the form
'R(a,b)' and 'f(a) =f(b)'. Because neither sentence is obtained from
the other by a mere expansion of atomic parts, there is no obvious
sense in which one expresses a fuller analysis of the thought than
does the other. Frege's acknowledgment of such pairs is a reason to
give a negative answer to the question of this section. The reason is
inconclusive, however, since Frege might well have held, if pressed,
that such incomparable pairs of sentences were always further reducible to some common sentence expressing a final analysis.
In the end, the answer to this question will have little impact on
the assessment of Hilbert's consistency proofs. If a set X of sentences
gives the final analysis of a set Hl of thoughts, then X is syntactically
consistent just in case H is Frege-consistent. But this will not mean
that a Hilbert-style consistency proof will demonstrate Frege-consistency. For in order to demonstrate the consistency of Hl, one will
need not just the Hilbert-style proof of syntactic consistency, but also
a proof of the auxiliary claim that E does indeed represent the "ultimate" analysis of H1.One will need a demonstration that the analysis
is finished. And this, of course, is a claim that turns not just on the
syntactic form of the sentences in E btuton the content of their nonlogical terms. It is the kind of claim, in short, that is indemonstrable
via a Hilbert-style consistency proof.
VI. CONCLUSION

Frege's assessment of Hilbert'swork as "on the whole a failure"is notjust
badly wrong, but terriblyshort-sighted.Given the growing importance at
the time of Frege's own work of the kind of formal investigationsundertaken by Hilbert, Frege's steadfastrefusal to acknowledge the existence
of a different but nonetheless extremely valuable conception also called
(perhaps unfortunately) "consistency"is striking.As the nineteenth-century revolution in geometrical methods and results had made clear, the
view of axioms as only partiallyinterpreted, and hence as capable of characterizing similaritiesacross abstractstructures,was an undeniably fruitful one. Further, Frege's own interest in formal systems and in relations
of syntacticderivabilityought to have enabled him to see the importance
of Hilbert's method for demonstrating nonderivability results, even if
these did not show what he would have called "independence."

This content downloaded from 128.6.218.72 on Fri, 10 Apr 2015 00:56:43 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

