FREGEAND HILBERTON CONSISTENCY

327

Point B lies betwveen
pointsA and C.

logically implies the thought:
Point B lies betweenpoints C and A.

then Hilbert's axiom:
(II.1) If A, B, Care points of a straight line and B lies between A and C,
then B lies between C and A.

would be, from Frege's point of view, superfluous. The thought expressed by II.1 would not be independent of the other axioms of order, despite the fact that the sentence 11.1 is clearly independent, in
Hilbert's sense, from those axiom sentences.
Similarly, if the analysis of the geometrical concepts alone suffices
to establish, for example, that the congruence of two triangles follows from the congruence of two sides and the enclosed angle of
those triangles, then no set of sentences containing the negation of
this axiom would express a set of Frege-consistent thoughts. This despite the fact that such a set will in general be Hilbert-consistent.
Frege does hold that a number of the axioms of geometry are independent of one another, and hence that no amount of conceptual
analysis will show them to be reducible to truths of logic or provable
from one another. There is no evidence that he takes any of
Hilbert's specific independence claims about geometrical axioms to
be false. Frege's objection is rather that nothing Hilbert demoncan support such claims.
strates in the Foundationsof Geometry
In general, the syntactic consistency of a set of sentences is insufficient to guarantee what Frege would consider the consistency of a
set of thoughts expressed by those sentences. The case is the same
with respect to property consistency and the existence of X-structures. The consistency of the property defined by a set I of
schematic sentences, and the existence of a I-structure, all turn on
the syntactic form of the sentences in S. For Frege, on the other
hand, two sets of sentences indistinguishable as to syntactic form can
express sets of thoughts one of which is consistent while the other is
not. Again, the results demonstrated by Hilbert's proofs do not imply the results with which Frege is concerned and on which, as Frege
sees it, the foundations of mathematics is based.
CONCEPTS
111.GEOMETRICAL

In addition to the consistency of thoughts, Frege recognizes a kind
of consistency that applies to properties or, as he would say, to concepts. Concepts, for Frege, come in levels. A first-level concept is one
under which objects fall; thus, the ordinary concept point, under

This content downloaded from 128.6.218.72 on Fri, 10 Apr 2015 00:56:43 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

