62

SYLVAIN BROMBERGER

M.I.T. is too simple and unrealistic to represent adequately the
strategic decisions faced by a real rational ignoramus even at real
M.I.T. But it is complex enough to indicate the network of problems

that his policy must handle, the different roles that knowledge will play

in its execution, and to bring out that the best strategy in most

situations will be far from obvious.

6. WHY BOTHER WITH ALL THIS?

The time has come to stop wondering about rational ignoramuses and
to start acting like one. And so let us ask: of what value are the
questions that we have been asking? What could their gosh or cash
value possibly be?
As far as I can see, it is not very great. Nor do I think that these
questions are likely to accrue added value from elsewhere. Their value
is of a different nature. The value of their answers lies in their

potential as question generatorsl They will generate at least two sets of
questions with high gosh value.
First, they generate a set of questions in philosophic epistemology.
Does our rational ignoramus embody plausible normative aspirations,
i.e., does he represent cognitive traits and intellectual attitudes that we
aspire to embody, and does his policy exhibit standards by which we

measure aspects of our worth and that of other human beings? Or
does he represent an unattainable, illusory, and uninteresting ideal of

no relevance to a responsible epistemic conscience?
Second, they generate a set of cognitive-psychological questions.
Are human beings rational ignoramuses of a sort at points of their
development? More specifically, are infants rational ignoramuses? To
conjecture that they are is to conjecture that at various stages of their
development they are endowed with representations of part of what
they do not know, with weighings attached to some of these represen

tations, with concepts of determinables, with question raising prin
ciples, and with value adders; it is to conjecture that they may come
innately equipped with such things, and that they may guide their
attention by such things. It is to invite ourselves to find out specific
features of that endowment and of its evolution. Thus the answer to

our questions about rational ignoramuses should raise new issues

about the nature of innate and acquired cognitive capacities.
But note that this is a dimension of value which has been given no
weight so far in the policy of our rational ignoramus: it is not gosh or

This content downloaded from 129.252.86.83 on Wed, 19 Sep 2018 12:11:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

