30

Philosophy of Science

of probability when articulating the notion of consistency for confidences?
Is there any compelling, positive case for believing that the logical coherence of confidences is appropriately described and legislated by the probability
calculus?
We have already seen one reason for thinking this: probability theory is a
conservative, straightforward generalization of classical, deductive logic for
dealing with cases of uncertainty. To the extent that classical logic offers a satisfactory logic of certainty, we want it to be preserved in the limiting cases of
a more general logic of confidence. Probability theory offers such a generalization by simply adapting deductive logic’s bivalent semantics of certainty to
gradational cases of uncertainty.
This argument, though informal, bears a strong resemblance to a more
formally rigorous case appealing to Cox’s well-known representation theorem (Cox 1946, 1961; cf., Jaynes 2003, ch. 2). Cox’s controversial theorem
(Halpern, 1999a,b; Colyvan, 2004, 2008) attempts to show that any real-valued
measure of confidence built upon the foundation of classical, propositional
logic (“the logical rules of Boolean algebra”) will be isomorphic to a probability function so long as the following two requirements are met: (i) an agent’s
confidence in any negation : is a monotonically decreasing function of that
agent’s confidence in ; and (ii) an agent’s confidence in any conjunction  ^
is a function of that agent’s confidences in either conjunct (say ) and in the
other conjunct “with the additional assumption that” the first conjunct is true
( j).
Requirement (i) is a weakening of Negation, making the very plausible
demand that greater confidence in any proposition corresponds with lesser
confidence in that proposition’s negation. Requirement (ii) also looks highly
plausible, especially when comparing it to alternatives. For example, one’s confidence in  ^ does not follow from corresponding, individual confidences in
 and . To adapt an example from Jaynes’s (2003, §2.1) extended argument
for (ii), I may be about equally confident in the three claims:
A: The next person I encounter will have blonde hair.
B: The next person I encounter will have a blue left eye.
C : The next person I encounter will have a brown right eye.
Nonetheless, my confidence in A ^ B is much greater than my confidence
in B ^ C , a difference that I take to be entirely consistent with my individual confidences in A, B, and C . This difference makes sense if confidences
in conjunctions are rather determined as in requirement (ii) – since, for example, my confidence in A given B is much greater than my confidence in B
given C .
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 201.141.17.62, on 08 Feb 2022 at 21:39:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108657563

