Chance-changing causal processes 55

questions: the question of whether the causal process between relation is intrinsic,
and the question of whether the causal relation is intrinsic.
Before doing that, however, let’s look at the broader picture for a moment.
There is a general tension between, on the one hand, thinking of causation as an
intrinsic relation and, on the other, holding (as most contemporary theorists do)
that an adequate analysis of causation must take account of the chances that causes
give their effects. (This is meant to include not just theories that appeal directly
to chance in their analysis of causation, but also to theories that simply seek to
do justice to the thought that causation and chance are somehow conceptually
connected. For example, a commitment to (CCT) displays a commitment to a
connection between causation and chance, whether or not (CCT) actually plays
a part in one’s analysis of causation.)
This tension arises because whether or not c raises the chance of e depends not
just on the intrinsic features of c – and not even just on the intrinsic features of c,
plus the intrinsic features of the causal process running from c to e, plus the laws of
nature – but on facts that are entirely extrinsic to c and to the causal process that
thereby leads to e. In the bus–brick case, for example – as Dowe notes – c lowers
rather than raises the chance of e because of the speed at which the bus happens to
be going. In the defoliant case, c lowers rather than raises the chance of e because
in fact external factors are not such as to jeopardize seriously the plant’s chances of
survival were all its leaves to remain intact. Whether or not c raises the chance of e
depends in part on what the chance of e would have been in the absence of c; and
that generally depends on features of the world that are nothing to do with the
intrinsic features of the actual causal process between c and e.
Moreover, whether c raises or lowers the chance of e also depends on what the
actual chance of e is; and this also often depends on facts that are extrinsic to the
causal process linking c and e. Suppose, for example, that the defoliant only has a
50% chance of affecting the plant’s leaves at all. Then the plant’s actual chance of
survival just after it is sprayed depends not only on how likely it is that the plant will
die if it loses its leaves, but also on how likely it is that it will die if its leaves remain
intact. Suppose that circumstances are such that if the plant keeps its leaves (whether
or not it is sprayed) it will have a 90% chance of survival, but that if it loses its leaves
(which it can only do if sprayed) its chance of survival will be just 20%. Then just
after spraying, the plant’s actual chance of survival is 55%. Now suppose that
circumstances are such that if it keeps its leaves it will have only a 10% chance of
survival (because of the presence in its immediate environment of a nasty leaf
disease, say). Then just after spraying, the plant’s actual chance of survival is 15%.
Thus extrinsic facts – facts about the surrounding environment – help determine the
actual chance of e, and thus whether or not c raises the chance of e, even though those
extrinsic facts play no part in the actual causal process leading from the spraying to
the survival. It is therefore very difficult to hold on to the idea that causation is an
intrinsic matter while at the same time holding that causation and chance are related.
On the view of causation as a chance-increasing causal process, causation is (at
least partially) extrinsic in a very obvious way, since, as we saw above, whether or

