J. Pearl/Causal inference in statistics

135

of this condition (through Eq. (45).) It states that W should be admissible (i.e.,
satisfy the back-door condition) relative the path(s) from Z to Y . This condition is readily comprehended by empirical researchers, and the task of selecting
such measurements, W , can then be guided by available scientific knowledge. See
details and graphical criteria in Pearl (2001, 2005) and in Petersen et al. (2006).
In particular, expression (48) is both valid and identifiable in Markovian
models, where each term on the right can be reduced to a “do-free” expression
using Eq. (24).
5.1.3. Indirect effects and the Mediation Formula
Remarkably, the definition of the natural direct effect (47) can easily be turned
around and provide an operational definition for the indirect effect – a concept
shrouded in mystery and controversy, because it is impossible, using standard
physical interventions, to disable the direct link from X to Y so as to let X
influence Y solely via indirect paths.
The natural indirect effect, IE, of the transition from x to x′ is defined as the
expected change in Y affected by holding X constant, at X = x, and changing
Z to whatever value it would have attained had X been set to X = x′ . Formally,
this reads (Pearl, 2001):
∆

IEx,x′ (Y ) = E((Yx,Zx′ ) − E(Yx )),

(49)

which is almost identical to the direct effect (Eq. (47)) save for exchanging x
and x′ .
Indeed, it can be shown that, in general, the total effect T E of a transition
is equal to the difference between the direct effect of that transition and the
indirect effect of the reverse transition. Formally,
∆

T E x,x′ (Y ) = E(Yx′ − Yx ) = DEx,x′ (Y ) − IEx′ ,x (Y ).

(50)

In linear systems, where reversal of transitions amounts to negating the signs
of their effects, we have the standard additive formula
T Ex,x′ (Y ) = DEx,x′ (Y ) + IEx,x′ (Y ).

(51)

Since each term above is based on an independent operational definition, this
equality constitutes a formal justification for the additive formula used routinely
in linear systems.
For completeness, we explicate (from (48) and (51)) the expression for indirect
effects under conditions of nonconfoundedness:
X
IEx,x′ (Y ) =
E(Y |x, z)[P (z|x′) − P (z|x)]
(52)
z

This expression deserves the label Mediation Formula, due to its pivotal role
in mediation analysis (Imai et al., 2008), which has been a thorny issue in several
sciences (Shrout and Bolger, 2002; MacKinnon et al., 2007; Mortensen et al.,
2009). When the outcome Y is binary (e.g., recovery, or hiring) the ratio (1 −

