J. Pearl/Causal inference in statistics

100

conditionalization, “controlling for,” and so on. Examples of causal concepts are:
randomization, influence, effect, confounding, “holding constant,” disturbance,
spurious correlation, faithfulness/stability, instrumental variables, intervention,
explanation, attribution, and so on. The former can, while the latter cannot be
defined in term of distribution functions.
This demarcation line is extremely useful in causal analysis for it helps investigators to trace the assumptions that are needed for substantiating various
types of scientific claims. Every claim invoking causal concepts must rely on
some premises that invoke such concepts; it cannot be inferred from, or even
defined in terms statistical associations alone.
2.3. Ramifications of the basic distinction
This principle has far reaching consequences that are not generally recognized
in the standard statistical literature. Many researchers, for example, are still
convinced that confounding is solidly founded in standard, frequentist statistics, and that it can be given an associational definition saying (roughly): “U is
a potential confounder for examining the effect of treatment X on outcome Y
when both U and X and U and Y are not independent.” That this definition
and all its many variants must fail (Pearl, 2000a, Section 6.2)2 is obvious from
the demarcation line above; if confounding were definable in terms of statistical
associations, we would have been able to identify confounders from features of
nonexperimental data, adjust for those confounders and obtain unbiased estimates of causal effects. This would have violated our golden rule: behind any
causal conclusion there must be some causal assumption, untested in observational studies. Hence the definition must be false. Therefore, to the bitter
disappointment of generations of epidemiologist and social science researchers,
confounding bias cannot be detected or corrected by statistical methods alone;
one must make some judgmental assumptions regarding causal relationships in
the problem before an adjustment (e.g., by stratification) can safely correct for
confounding bias.
Another ramification of the sharp distinction between associational and causal
concepts is that any mathematical approach to causal analysis must acquire new
notation for expressing causal relations – probability calculus is insufficient. To
illustrate, the syntax of probability calculus does not permit us to express the
simple fact that “symptoms do not cause diseases,” let alone draw mathematical
conclusions from such facts. All we can say is that two events are dependent—
meaning that if we find one, we can expect to encounter the other, but we cannot distinguish statistical dependence, quantified by the conditional probability
P (disease|symptom) from causal dependence, for which we have no expression
in standard probability calculus. Scientists seeking to express causal relationships must therefore supplement the language of probability with a vocabulary
2 For example, any intermediate variable U on a causal path from X to Y satisfies this
definition, without confounding the effect of X on Y .

