OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 14/8/2018, SPi

THE POWER OF INTERVENTION



a corrosion inhibitor. We concede that this distinction between prevention and
interference is not completely sharp. It may be a distinction that applies just on the
basis of how detailed is the speciﬁcation of the effect. In interference, one is effectively
preventing a very precisely speciﬁed effect occurring even if a similar though slightly
different one occurs. Hence, in a case we could think of as interference, some iron
rusting after ﬁve years may be prevented from occurring, but rusting after ten years
occurs in its place. So for many of the examples we will discuss here, we need not take
the trouble to adhere rigidly to the distinction between prevention and interference.
The possibility of prevention can be a bad thing, we have seen, if it is important
to us that the expected effect is produced. We always want aeroplanes to stay aloft
through their forward and upward thrust and that an antibiotic will kill a bacterial
infection. Anything that interferes with the desired causal process, such as antibiotic
resistance, is thus a threat to these desired outcomes. But the opportunity of prevention
can also be to our advantage, where the effect is something that we want to avoid.
If we can prevent a disease killing someone, or rain causing a mudslide, then it is
all to the good. Interference in the otherwise regular course of events then comes to
be thought of as an intervention or manipulation, especially if human agents are the
ones interfering.
The possibility of intervention can be crucial. If causes produced perfect regularities then we would be powerless to prevent them. Whenever there was C, there
would be E. This is another way of saying that there would be the regularity of
C always followed by E, which is what we mean by a perfect regularity. Of course, we
could, in that case, try to prevent C from occurring in the ﬁrst place, if E is something
one needed to avoid. For example, suppose that if a nuclear reactor goes critical, the
core will melt, releasing lethal doses of radiation. In that case, one’s best approach is
to prevent the reactor going critical.
But there are other cases where C may have occurred already or be unavoidable, so
we cannot stop it. Or C might have otherwise desirable effects that we wish to exploit.
What does one then do if the undesirable E always follows C? It seems one has to
accept the inevitable doom of the disease, or the radiation of x-ray photography. That
is at least what a pure regularity view seems to imply.
However, the possibility of prevention and interference can be our saviour from
the inevitability of undesirable causation. Since causes typically interact and produce
different outcomes in different contexts, it is possible for us to intervene to avoid an
unwanted effect. We can also intervene to bring about the effect we do want. This is
why there are philosophers who understand causation in terms of intervention or
manipulability (for instance Woodward 2003).
Sometimes we need a whole set of advanced tools and instruments to perform the
manipulation, such as those we assemble under laboratory conditions. A striking
example is, as already mentioned, the vast mechanism and organization, spending a
huge budget, that is required to collide hadrons with adequate control at CERN. The
cheaper option is where some manipulations are simply simulated in a model for

