OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 14/8/2018, SPi

CALCULATING CONDITIONALS



For our purpose here, we should keep the distinction between these three. This
allows us to meaningfully ask: is the ratio formula suitable for generating accurate
estimates of conditional probability? We think the answer is no, which might be
unsurprising in light of our commitment to propensity theory (cf. Humphreys’
paradox, 1985) and causal singularism. Nonetheless, we think there is more to be
said about exactly why the ratio formula fails as a tool for calculating conditional
probabilities.
Our ﬁrst concern is that conditional probabilities are here analysed in terms of
unconditional probabilities. We have already indicated in Section 21.1 why we follow
Popper (1959) and de Finetti (1974) in taking conditional probabilities as primitive.
The source of the problem, however, lies not primarily in the understanding of
probabilities, but in how conditional and causal relations are traditionally analysed.
These, we will argue, need to be treated as primitive wholes rather than being analysed
into something else.
Kolmogorov’s ratio formula is a typical analysis, given as an equation. The
equation indicates a symmetric relationship, but some asymmetry still follows.
Understood as a deﬁnition, the formula must be read left to right, from the conditional to the unconditional probabilities. As a tool for calculation, however, we must
use it right to left: that is, we start from the unconditional probabilities in order to
calculate the conditional probability. Many equations have this asymmetry involved,
even though the value on each side is the same. Take Newton’s second law, F = ma.
F might be deﬁned as ma, but the calculation only goes one way, from mass and
acceleration to force. Of course, from any two values we can calculate the third. But
the case we are considering is where we know only the value of F. We then know the
value of ma but we cannot, from this, decompose that value into the individual values
of m and of a. And in the arithmetic equation 2 + 2 = 4, we know that 2 + 2 can only
have one answer while 4 could be the result of many different calculations. The same
could be said of chance and propensities. Even if an overall chance is made up of
individual propensities, we cannot say what the individual propensities are from the
overall chance. The fact that something can be calculated from certain components
does not, therefore, entail that they can be analysed into those exact components.
There could be composition without decomposition.
We think conditional probabilities neither compose nor decompose. They are
primitive. We thus deny that they can be deﬁned, derived, analysed, or calculated by
way of unconditional probabilities. But our reason for saying this is that we think
conditionals in general do not compose or decompose, as we now go on to explain.

21.3 Calculating Conditionals
Within standard propositional logic, conditional statements, ‘if p then q’, are represented by the material conditional, ‘p ⊃ q’. But since this is deﬁned only as a function
of the antecedent ‘p’ and the consequent ‘q’, the conditional is thought to be composed

