I could experiment on most of the putative causal factors for properly baking
a cake. However, I also investigated a larger set of instances by asking my sister,
who also bakes with the same recipe, about her baking experiences. I could not
intervene on the factors she mentioned, but I could record concomitant variations
of the rising of the cake with other factors: Do variations in the type of yeast lead
to different results in rising? Does the type of oven? Did she notice other factors
that may have a causal role?

You might want to know whether Mill’s methods led to any useful result. They did.
It seems the problem was using a certain food processor which has blades that can
cut when they turn clockwise, or just mix when they turn anti-clockwise. A chemist
friend of mine hypothesized that blades may break yeast molecules, thus affecting cake
rising. (Notice that this is a mechanism-based explanation, see chapter 12; notice also
that such an explanation uses both evidence of difference-making and of mechanisms,
see chapter 6.) I also tried the stability of this explanation by using a traditional mixer,
which does not cut, and also using the original food processor, but setting the blades
to turn anti-clockwise. (Notice, this amounts to testing invariance under intervention,
see chapter 10.) And the cake rose properly again!
The fourth method is the one that most prominently makes use of the notion
of variation, as Mill uses the actual word. But the other methods, considered carefully, are also about variations. In comparing instances in the Method of Agreement
and of Difference, we look precisely at things that vary, and at things that stay the
same. Causal reasoning in Mill’s methods recommends that we do more than simply observe the effect (failed rising) following the cause (to be determined!). The four
methods tell us to look for how things vary or stay the same, when other factors
change or stay the same. Whether these observed variations are regular—and what
that means—is a further question, and we address it later in this chapter and also in
chapter 15.
Mill says that the four methods are particularly well suited to the natural sciences
and that the experimental method is inapplicable in the social sciences (Mill, 1843,
Book VI, chs VI–VII). Yet he also specifies that between observation and experiment
there is no logical distinction but only a practical one (Mill, 1843, Book III, ch VII).
We could read this as a statement about a unified logic underlying causal methods.
The rationale of variation (see also later) goes precisely in this direction. However, the
problem of causality in observational studies is not overtly addressed in Mill’s work,
as he does not tell us what alternative method, in line with his four methods, would
be suitable for observational contexts. So Mill just states that there is logical unity and
does not address the difference in practice. We explain how theorizers of variations fill
in the details in the rest of the chapter.
It is at this stage that the work of another pioneering methodologist comes to the
rescue. Emile Durkheim argues against the view that the four methods cannot be
applied in the social sciences (Durkheim, 1912, ch VI). According to Durkheim the
comparative method is the only way to make sociology scientific. However, not all of
the Millian four methods will do. Only the Millian Method of Concomitant Variations
will, for the obvious reason that in the observational contexts typical of social science
we cannot really change the putative factors. Durkheim claims that the method of

170 | variation

