A Causal Theory of Counterfactuals 649

concept of an "actual cause", but instead used the substitute concept of
"direct positive influence". There are well-known cases in which causes and
positive influences come apart. These pose problems for my theory of
counterfactuals, and they pose problems precisely because of the divergence
of my substitute concept from that of an actual cause.

Fig. 7 illustrates a case of "preemption". Two assassins conspire to kill a
king: the Master Assassin and the Bumbling Assassin. The Master Assassin
hides in the closet, dagger in cloak. The Bumbling Assassin mixes poison in
the king's soup, and carries it from the kitchen. But the Bumbling Assassin

really is a bumbling assassin, and he bumps the closet door as he passes by,
locking the Master Assassin inside. Then he runs into a chair. He stumbles
and the soup sloshes in the bowl, but he recovers, and sets the soup in front
of the king, who eats it and dies shortly afterward.

TCM applied to the model of Fig. 7 gets the right answers for the case.
For example, BA = 0 > KD = 1 is false. But we might also represent the
case as in Fig. 8. Given laws similar to those we assumed for the original
case, MA counts as a "direct positive influence" on KD in a model for
Fig. 8, while BA does not. Thus, TCM treats the case as similar to that of

the poison and antidote, Fig. 1(a), and we get the wrong answer that
BA = 0 > KD = 1 is true.

This example illustrates both that positive influences (MA) can f
actual causes, and that negative influences (BA) can be. Given a m

as Fig. 8, direct positive influences can fail to be causes, and direct n

influences can be. However, it seems to me that this is possible on
models that are incomplete in crucial respects. Fig. 7 is clearly
representation of the case in question, and in it the relations o
influence do match the causal facts. I suggest that all cases of n

influences that are causes are cases in which the cause interacts with other

influences on the effect. Those interactions occur in causally intervening
processes. I suggest also that all cases of positive influences that are not
actual causes are cases in which some intervening causal process does not go
to completion. (Unfortunately, to argue these points would take us into the
details of theory of causation.14)

Clause (iii) says, "M is complete enough to accurately represent the

causal relations among the events of C that appear in M". "Complete
enough" means that the model represents cases of mixed influence as such
(e.g., the multiple paths from BA to KD in Fig. 7), and includes enough
variables to capture whether intervening causal processes go to completion
(e.g., whether MA is locked in the closet). This tells us to use Fig. 7 rather
than 8 for the case of the assassins. I suggest that these requirements suffice

to solve the problems that arise from our use of the substitute concept of
direct positive influence.

Clause (ii) of "Good Model" says, "(ii) the laws of M are accurate of
C, or accurate enough". This is the really difficult requirement. The issue

This content downloaded from 131.156.224.67 on Sat, 03 Sep 2016 11:41:24 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

