1072

Lauren N. Ross

not to any other location. These neural pathways constrain the flow of signaling—
they explain why it is impossible for this signal (or lack of it) to impact areas outside
of the downstream site of interest that they lead to. This basic notion of constraint
is ubiquitous in neuroscience and central to many different frameworks for
understanding the brain (Friston 2011; Bassett et al. 2021).
Consider a few challenges for viewing these neural constraints as non-causal,
which is suggested by Lange’s analysis. First, scientists often refer to the neural
connectivity in these cases as causal and capturing causal information (Sporns 2007;
Friston 2011). Second, these neural connections successfully meet standards of
interventionist causality, in contrast to Lange’s claims. Recall Lange’s claim that
constraints reveal “no obvious variables to be changed” as they are “fixed” such that
changing them “reveals nothing” (Lange 2018, 87–8). These claims fail to hold for
neural constraints because we not only consider changes to them, but these changes
are present and studied across individuals. For example, the fact that sensory nerve
patterns vary across individuals helps explain why viral lesions in the same spinal
nerve produce different sensory outcomes across patients (Lee et al. 2008).4
Differences in neural pathways in the brains of adolescents and adults is studied
and cited in explaining behavior differences across these groups (Baum et al. 2017).
Finally, another point in favor of viewing these neural pathways as causal is that they
are factors that “make-a-difference” to the outcome of interest. This is suggested in
the lesion–paralysis case above—if the lesioned area were causally connected to a
different downstream location, this would change the location of paralysis.
3.2. Physiology: Vascular pathways
As a second example, consider vascular pathways or blood vessels in the context of
physiology. Scientists refer to blood vessels as factors that “constrain” the flow
of blood and they cite them in explaining particular outcomes. Consider the case of
pulmonary embolism after clot formation in the large veins of the leg. When a clot
forms in the large vessels of the leg (common after periods of sitting or with use of
some medications), a particular pathophysiological outcome often occurs—the clot
can travel to, lodge in, and cause damage in the vasculature of the lung, which is
called a pulmonary embolism. In this case, our explanatory question is: when a large
clot forms in the leg veins, why does it lead to embolism-related damage in the lung,
as opposed to anywhere else in the body? Why doesn’t it result in an embolism in the
liver, arm, brain, spleen, etc.? The answer to this question involves citing the vascular
architecture of the human body—namely, that the veins in the leg lead directly to the
lung (where the vessels narrow, trapping the clot) and they do not lead anywhere
else. This explains why, given the starting location of such a clot, it is impossible for it
to travel to and do damage in any other location. Thus, the fact that the blood vessels
constrain the flow of blood in this way explains why such a pathological outcome
presents in this area and not another. Similar strategies are used to explain the
unique flow of infectious material in the body (Meyers et al. 2005) and the spread of
cancerous cells through the lymphatic system (Estourgie et al. 2004). The flow of these
materials is constrained and explained by these vessels and anatomical structures.
4

This is seen in variations in dermatome maps across individuals (Lee et al. 2008).

