Counterfactual theories, preemption and persistence 71

which is distinct from D1, D2, … , Dn and E (C may or may not be distinct from
C'), (iii) ch(E-line)-at-tC = p, and (iv) ¬C → ch(E-line)-at-t¬C<p.
(Schaffer 2001a: 85)
Schaffer argues that each preempting cause is an essential part of a process that
includes the effect (Schaffer 2001a: 87).27 To illustrate, Schaffer considers an
example in which Pam throws a rock at a window, while Bob, a more reliable
thrower, holds off throwing. Had Pam not thrown her rock, Bob would have
thrown his rock. Pam’s throw is a preempting cause of the window shattering,
although it lowers the probability of that event given Bob’s greater reliability.
Given that Pam’s throw preempts Bob’s throw in shattering the window, there is
the sequence of events, which are pairwise lawfully related, of her throwing the
brick, her brick flying through the air, hitting the window, and shattering it.
‘Pam’s throw is part of this process and an essential part, since without it if the
window gets shattered at all it will be by a different process entirely: Bob’s
process’ (Schaffer 2001a: 87).
Again consider Case A. Assume that the processes involved are governed by
fundamental probabilistic laws such that the events on the main line and on the
alternate line are pairwise subsumable under fundamental probabilistic laws. By
law, d’s firing increases the probability of e’s firing and, by law, g’s firing increases
the chances of e’s firing. Schaffer’s lawful-sequence account of processes gives,
then, the wrong result for the preempted cause. d’s firing is an essential part of a
Schaffer-process culminating in e’s firing. This becomes even clearer when we
consider Schaffer’s solution to a case in which a major’s order to a corporal trumps
a sergeant’s equivalent order. ‘Applying the lawful sequence analysis of processes:
there are trumping laws linking ranking orders to decisions. Since the major’s order
is the ranking order, only the major’s order, not the sergeant’s, instantiates the antecedent. The corporal’s decision instantiates the consequent’ (Schaffer 2001a: 87).
The sergeant’s order is not, but the major’s order is, on process to the effect because
the former does not instantiate an antecedent of such a (fundamental) law but the
latter does.28 The same approach does not work for the preempted cause, d’s firing
(Figure 5.1), since it meets the conditions of ‘Analysis 1 Interpreted’:
(i) there is an extended event ‘E-line’ containing actual distinct events <d’s
firing, e’s firing> in pairwise (probabilistic) nomic subsumption relations,
(ii) there is an actual event d’s firing at td’s firing which is distinct from e’s
firing, (iii) ch(E-line)-at-tc = p, and (iv) ¬d’s firing → ch (E-line)-at-t¬c<p.29
d’s firing is an essential part of a process that includes e’s firing under the nomic
conception of processes.
The lesson is that the lawful-sequence conception of a ‘process’ is not the way to
go to handle persistence preemption. I will now consider a simple form of transference theory with that lesson in mind. As we shall see, for transference theory to
handle Case A, the transference relation must not be just a matter of lawful sequence.

