58

Causation with a Human Face

suppose, actual cause judgments are not very central to physics. More generally,
different causal notions are differentially important in different sciences. The
control-​related notion of causal specificity (a notion not discussed in this book,
but see Woodward 2010) is important in biology but arguably not in physics, in
part because of contingent facts about biological organisms and perhaps other
designed structures. So in stressing the continuity among various forms of causal
thinking I do not mean to imply that, say, every feature of common-​sense causal
thinking is reproduced throughout science.

A.5. Eliminativism
Some philosophers are commonly interpreted as holding that thinking about the
world in terms of cause and effect is fundamentally misguided or confused—​
perhaps because such thinking is inconsistent with what “fundamental physics”
tells us about the world or perhaps for some other reason.52 These writers favor
elimination of the notion of cause from our thinking or at least from important parts of it (such as scientific inquiry) and its replacement with something
else—​often claims about correlations or regularities interpreted along “Humean”
lines. As explained earlier, advocates of a functional perspective can agree that
the application of causal notions has empirical preconditions and that it is possible that these will not be satisfied in certain domains of inquiry. But, as argued,
functionalists will also insist that just because these preconditions are not satisfied in certain domains, it does not follow that they are unsatisfied in all others
and that causal thinking is inappropriate everywhere. Moreover, functionalists
will (or should) ask about the proposed replacement for causal thinking (if any)
and about the extent to which it can fulfill the functions previously associated
with causal thinking. Suppose, for example, that the replacement does not provide the resources to distinguish between those relationships that are exploitable
for manipulation and control and those that are not. Advocates of a functional
approach (or at least advocates who think that the interventionist framework captures aspects of the function of causal thinking) will see this as highly
problematic since there is an important function of causal thinking that is not
supplied by the replacement. (Note that the replacement is rejected on that basis
and not just because it is contrary to “intuition.”)

52

One candidate for such a view is Russell 1912.

