70

jim woodward

similar point holds for some quantum mechanical contexts.⁵ If, alternatively
(or in addition) we think of causal claims as having to do with unfolding
of causal processes in time from some local point of origin, as a number
of philosophers (e.g. Salmon 1984, Dowe 2000) do, then few if any
fundamental laws are causal in the sense of directly describing such processes⁶
(Smith forthcoming). In part for these reasons and in part for other reasons
that will be discussed on p. 73, the widely accepted idea that all true causal
claims in common sense and the special sciences ‘instantiate’ fundamental
physical laws which are causal in character, with causal status of the former
being ‘grounded’ in these fundamental laws alone is deeply problematic.⁷
In short, while there is no convincing argument for the conclusion that
causation ‘plays no role’ in fundamental physics, there is also good reason to
be skeptical of a sort of causal foundationalism or fundamentalism according
to which fundamental physical laws supply a causal foundation for all of
the causal claims occurring in the special sciences, and according to which,
every application of a fundamental physical theory must be interpretable in
terms of a notion of ‘cause’ possessing all of the features of the notion that
figures in common sense and the special sciences.

4.2 Causation in the Special Sciences
Whatever may be said about the role of causation in physics, it seems uncontroversial that causal claims play a central role in many areas of human
life and inquiry. Causal notions are of course ubiquitous in common sense
reasoning and ‘ordinary’ discourse. Numerous psychological studies detail
⁵ For example, it is arguable, (cf. Hausman and Woodward 1999) that there is no well-defined notion
of an intervention on the spin state of one of the separated particles pairs with respect to the other
in EPR type experiments. This would represent a limitation on the application of an interventionist
account of causation only if there was reason to suppose that there is a direct causal connection between
these states. Hausman and Woodward argue that there is no such reason; hence that it is a virtue, rather
than a limitation in the interventionist account that, in contrast to other accounts of causation, it does
not commit us to such a connection.
⁶ Nor, contrary to ‘conserved quantity’ accounts of causation of the sort championed by Salmon and
Dowe, will it always be possible to characterize ‘causal processes’ in fundamental physical contexts in
terms of the transference of energy and momentum in accordance with a conservation law. Typically,
the spacetimes characterized in General Relativity lack the symmetries that permit the formulation of
global (that is, integral versions of) conservation laws. In such cases, no spatially/temporally extended
process (no matter, how intuitively ‘causal’) will possess well-defined conserved energy/momentum.
See Rueger (1998) for more detailed discussion.
⁷ Davidson (1967) is a classic source for this idea.

