MACH S PRINCIPLE AND THE LAWS OF LOGIC

they also enable us to transcend the actuality of the world. The logical
operations we are capable of performing are just some of the things
that our evolutionary development has equipped us to do, and like other
features of our heredity they can be assumed to reflect a close adjustment
to the facts of our environment. If these facts are contingent, then
logical laws are also contingent, while if they are necessary the necessity
of those laws is still extrinsic to logic and depends on an empirical relationship between it and the world.
In this light we need to look again at the doctrine that tautologies are
empirically empty, perhaps to abandon it in favor of the doctrine that
on the contrary they are empirically full, if I may so put it.2 Identity
and contradiction aren't just logical rules (although they are that), nor
are they laws of thought; they are laws of nature, reflecting just those
properties of the world which, according to the analogous form of
Mach's principle, determine the logic we are bound to use in dealing
with it. They aren't obviously falsifiable (as remarked earlier, our imaginations aren't up to envisaging counterinstances, and by now it should
be obvious why not) but their nonfalsifiability is clearly of a different
kind from the nonfalsifiability of pseudoscientific or metaphysical claims.
For that matter, in an important sense the other inductively established
laws of nature aren't falsifiable either. It is one thing to know (to be
able to imagine, etc.) what a counterinstance would be like, another to
be able to produce one. We can of course construct interesting but as
yet useless systems incorporating alternative rules, but we can do that
for logic too. Physical laws, like logical ones, function as rules within
the theoretical systems to which they belong and acquire the status of
laws only on the successful application of those systems to empirical
problems.
What holds for the laws of deductive logic holds equally and under
precisely the same conditions for the laws of inductive logic. In neither
case are we really guaranteed success in advance; if in the deductive case
it is claimed that consistency itself requires the outcome, it must be
recognized that consistency in language is one thing, consistency in the
world another, and that the former, again, reflects the latter. We count
heavily on the world's consistency and are perpetually vindicated in
2

See in this connection Charles Hartshorne, "Some Empty Though Important
Truths," in Sidney Hook, ed., American Philosophers at Work (New York: Criterion Books, 1956), pp. 225ff.

493

