Peter Caws
will hold in the future any more than the inductive ones?
After a bit of spluttering, and assuming that the question is taken
seriously (as I mean it to be), the reply to this is likely to be a challenge:
How could the deductive relations be different, since they are rules of
procedure and not laws of nature? What would it be like for them to be
different? What conceivable test could be proposed that would reveal
exceptions to them? To which I readily answer that I have no idea, I
can't imagine an exception, it doesn't even make sense to me — but nor
do I conclude, from these limitations on my powers of fantasy, that the
thing is impossible. I can readily think of exceptions in the case of induction; I can't conceive of them in the case of deduction — but there
must surely be more to it than that, or if there isn't, then the debate is
shifting to my territory. For imagining, conceiving, and the like aren't
logical categories at all, but rather psychological and thus empirical
ones.
But for counterinstances to arise in the deductive case would surely involve a self-contradiction. Here the deductive logician is likely to start
writing things down, showing that the very rules of the language L entail
the analyticity of this proposition or that. Now, however, I can afford
to be generous. I have no objection whatever to analyticity within languages—for incorporating the law of contradiction as a rule in such
languages; indeed, given the world we live in, it seems a sound move.
But I can quite easily imagine a language in which the law of contradiction was not a rule, in which (let us say) truth-values were assigned at
random; it might be spoken by some latter-day Epimenides, who would
explain that Cretans aren't really liars, it's just that they don't,care one
way or the other, and if they contradict themselves then they contradict
themselves and that's all there is to it. We care about truth —and that
is a fact, not a principle of logic. And it is our caring about truth, not
just about the rules of the language, that makes us choose the rules we
do.
If during the argument the logician has written something down,
that is particularly gratifying. For inscriptions have a factual presence,
and as long as we hang on to them we can keep ideas (and propositions
and a lot of other metaphysical baggage) at arm's length. The curious
dependence of logicians on factual things like inscriptions (not to mention brains) ought to tip us off to a discrepancy between theory and
practice. In theory logic reaches for immutable truth (most logicians
490

