Mathematical Explanations in Evolutionary Biology or…

1099

non-causal explanations, then Walsh should address the present challenge. The compatibility with a naturalist stance is not a matter of quantity. So, to investigate whether Walsh’s
account is compatible with a naturalist stance, we have to search whether at least one kind
of MENP is an acceptable kind of explanations in Walsh’s view.
And it seems that at least one kind of MENP is in fact acceptable in Walsh’s view,
namely drift explanations. Indeed, in several places Walsh describes drift explanations
along the same lines in which drift explanations are described by MENP supporters,
such as Lange (2013a). For example, in Walsh (2007) he explains why drift is stronger in
smaller populations by making reference to different series of coin tosses and the CLT.
Walsh’s example can be summarized as follows. Suppose that two fair coins are tossed
50 times each. The result of each toss can be either head (H) or tail (T). The probability
of H and T “can be seen as the analogue of the fitnesses of two alleles at the same locus”
(Walsh, 2007, p. 293), and the number of tosses can be seen as the analogue of the size of
a population. There are at least three different ways to describe the 100 tosses performed.
(1) A single series of 100 tosses of a fair coin. The results are:
(a) 49 H; 51 T
(2) Two series of 50 tosses of a fair coin, with two coins being tossed. In this case, the
results are:
(a) 20 H; 30 T
(b) 29 H; 21 T
(3) Ten series of 10 tosses of a fair coin. The results are of the tosses are:
(a) 4 H; 6 T
(b) 7 H; 3 T
(c) 3 H; 7 T
(d) 5 H; 5 T
(e) 4 H; 6 T
(f) 5 H; 5 T
(g) 5 H; 5 T
(h) 5 H; 5 T
(i) 4 H; 6 T
(j) 7 H; 3 T
What is notable and worth of being explained is that in the “population” of 100 tosses
taken as a whole, there is only a slight departure from the expected outcome of 50 H and
50 T. On the contrary, there is a considerably greater degree of departure from expectation
in the population considered as two series of 50 tosses. Finally, the degree of departure from
expectation observed is greater still when we consider the same population as ten series of
10 tosses. But those three results do not refer to three different populations, rather they are
“different ways of describing the same population” (ibidem, p. 296). Now, according to
Walsh, the only way to provide a satisfactory explanation of why the “force of drift in the
population as a whole is small” (ibidem) is to deny that that population can be regarded as
really made of ten independent tosses. Only if we consider it as a whole we can explain the
fact that drift is larger in smaller sub-populations of a given population. Indeed, in this way
we can regard each of the ten series of 10 tosses as “drawn at random from a larger, normally
distributed population” (ibidem), and this would explain why drift is larger in the series of
ten tosses that constitutes the population than in the population as a whole: it is the “central
limit theorem [that] entails that the means of samples of the same size drawn from a normal

13

