INTRODUCTION
limited amounts of information, never make logical or mathematical mistakes,
and know all the logical consequences of their beliefs. Of course, no humans —
not even geniuses —come close to such ideals. This may favor studying more
realistic models of rational agents, but I do not think that we have grounds for
dismissing the usual theories of rationality altogether. The ideals they describe,
although unattainable in practice, still serve to guide and correct our thinking.
For example, we know that perfect memories would help us make better deci¬
sions. Instead of settling for poor decisions, we have tried to overcome our limi¬
tations by programming computers —which have larger and better memories
than we do —to assist us in those tasks whose success depends on storing and
retrieving large quantities of information.
Another problem with putting much weight on the distinction between nor¬
mative and descriptive decision theory is that some abstract decision models
have been introduced with neither normative nor descriptive ends in mind. I am
thinking of the concept of rational economic man used in economics. This
hypothetical being is an ideally rational agent whose choices always are the most
likely to maximize his personal profit. By appealing to a hypothetical society of
rational economic men economists can derive laws of supply and demand and
other important principles of economic theory. Yet economists admit that the no¬
tion of rational economic man is not a descriptive model. Even people with the
coolest heads and greatest business sense fail to conform to this ideal. Sometimes
we forget the profit motive. Or we aim at making a profit but miscalculate. Nor
do economists recommend that we emulate economic man: Maximizing personal
profit is not necessarily the highest good for human beings. Thus the model is
intended neither normatively nor descriptively, it is an explanatory idealization.
Like physicists speculating about perfect vacuums, frictionless surfaces, or ideal
gases, economists ignore real-life complications in the hope of erecting a theory
that will be simple enough to yield insights and understanding while still apply¬
ing to the phenomena that prompted it.
For these reasons I favor dropping the normative-descriptive distinction in
favor of a terminology that recognizes the gradation from experimental and sur¬
vey research toward the more speculative discussions of those interested in ei¬
ther explanatory or normative idealizations. With the caveat that there is really
a spectrum rather than a hard-and-fast division, I propose the terms “experimen¬
tal and “abstract” to cover these two types of decision-theoretic research.
This book will be concerned exclusively with abstract decision theory and
will focus on its logical and philosophical foundations. This does not mean that
readers will find nothing here of practical value. Some of the concepts and meth¬
ods I will expound are also found in business school textbooks. My hope is that
readers will come to appreciate the assumptions such texts often make and some
of the perplexities they generate.
Another important division within decision theory is that between deci¬
sions made by individuals and those made by groups. For the purposes of this
division an individual need not be a single human being (or other animal). Cor¬
porations, clubs, nations, states, and universities make decisions as individuals
4

