DECISIONS UNDER RISK: UTILITY

spans, quicker brains, sharper mathematical powers, and so forth. Thus our
judgment that a given act is irrational could be entirely relevant to a theory of
an ideally rational agent. In confronting the Ellsberg and Allais paradoxes, then,
one of the chief issues will be whether we should take our aversion to the choices
recommended by utility theory as failures on our part to be less than fully rational or as evidence that utility theory has incorrectly characterized rational choice
under risk.
Decision theorists have taken both approaches to those paradoxes. Savage,
you will recall, tried to show us that the Allais paradox is simply a trick that
is easily explained away when seen in a clear light. But others have complicated
and revised decision theory to discount the utility of acts involving systems
whose biases are unknown and to mark up those involving certainties. If we decide to reject Savage's or similar resolutions, we should take such theories seriously and see whether they harbor their own paradoxes or anomalies. Since
these theories are even more complicated than standard utility theory, I must
forgo that task here.
The St. Petersburg and Predictor paradoxes, by contrast, are intended to
show not that utility theory conflicts with our untutored views of rationality but
rather that it is internally incoherent: that it offers, as in the Predictor paradox,
conflicting recommendations, or that it commits us to something of infinite utility so long as there is no upper bound to our preferences. Again, there are those
who have taken these paradoxes to heart and have offered revised versions of
utility theory. Causal decision theory is an example. And again, there are experts who believe that these paradoxes dissolve when carefully analyzed. Eells
is a case in point.
There has been an additional and most interesting reaction to the Predictor paradox, however. Some people believe that it reveals that there are two
types of rationality. One type is captured by decision theories that apply the
dominance rule to the Predictor problem; the other is captured by theories that
follow the rule of expected utility maximization. Thus, just as we have had
alternative geometries for over a hundred years and alternative logics and
set theories for the last fifty years, we might now have alternative decision
theories.
In sum, reactions to the paradoxes range from dismissing them as intellectual illusions to proposing revisions of utility theory to entertaining the possibility of alternative conceptions of rational choice. Plainly, it will be a while before
a consensus on the paradoxes is obtained.
4-7. References
The classic presentation of the version of utility theory expounded in this chapter
is contained in Von Neumann and Morgenstern. Raiffa is a clear introductory
account, which focuses more on the relation between monetary values and utility
than I have here. Savage contains a brief history of the concept of utility. For
the Ellsberg and Allais paradoxes see Ellsberg and Allais, respectively. Replies
119

