DECISIONS UNDER RISK: UTILITY
To respond to this criticism we must distinguish between those multistage
lotteries that are simply theoretical idealizations introduced for calibrating utility
scales and real-life multistage lotteries that may take weeks or months to be com¬
pleted. We can think of theoretical lotteries as being run and paid off in an in¬
stant. Given this it would not make sense for an agent to distinguish between
having, say, a $100 ticket to an instantaneous simple lottery ticket paying $100
unconditionally and an instantaneous multistage lottery with the same outcome.
In this case we need not take the objection seriously.
On the other hand, if a multistage lottery takes place over time, we cannot
use this reply. Suppose, for example, that in situation A an agent is faced with
the prospect of a 25% chance of selling her house today and a 75% chance of
never selling it. In situation B, the same agent is faced with a 50% chance of
agreeing today on an option to sell the house within the week and a 50% chance
of never selling it. However, if the option is taken, the agent faces a 50% chance
that the prospective buyer will obtain a loan and buy the house within the week
and a 50% chance that the deal will collapse and the house will never be sold.
Using lottery trees we might represent the two situations as follows (figure 4-5).
Situation

A

Situation

B

Figure 4-5
If the outcomes are as these trees represent them, the compound lottery in B
reduces to the simple lottery in A in accordance with the reduction-of-compound-lotteries condition. That would constitute a genuine objection to a theory
since an agent who sorely needs to sell her house today would rightly prefer A
to B. But are the outcomes really as the trees represent them? I think not, for
in situation B the sale is not made today but within the week. Someone who
needs his money now or dislikes the suspense of waiting as much as one week
will not view the outcomes in A and B as the same. Thus the compound lottery
in B and the simple one in A do not satisfy the antecedent of the reduction condi¬
tion and, accordingly, do not qualify as counterexamples. I would expect that
other “over time” counterexamples could be dissolved similarly.

102

