DECISIONS UNDER IGNORANCE

1.
2.

3.

4.

PROBLEMS
Convert the 1 to 5 scale used to rank a-j into a 20 to 25 scale, into a - 5
to 0 scale, and into a scale whose numbers are all between 0 and 1.
What happens to an ordinal scale when it is transformed by multiplying each
number by — 1 ? By 0? Are these acceptable transformations of the original
scale? Why or why not?
Show that the transformation t of an ordinal utility scale u into a scale, t(u),
produces a scale that also satisfies conditions (a) and (b), provided / satisfies
condition (c).
Show that the following are ordinal transformations:

5. Is the transformation t(x) =x2 an ordinal transformation when applied to a
scale whose numbers are greater than or equal to 0? What if some of the
numbers are negative?
6. Suppose an agent has preferences for paired items (x; y ) where item x is the
amount of time she has to live and y is the amount of time she will go through
her death throes. Let us suppose that x varies continuously between 0 moments and 20 years and y between 0 moments and 2 weeks. The agent always
prefers to live longer and suffer less but puts an absolute priority on living
longer. This means, for instance, that she prefers the pair (18 years; 2 weeks)
to (17 years; 11 months and 28 days; 25 minutes). Explain why it is impossible to use an ordinary finite number scale to represent the agent's preferences,
although she does satisfy the ordering condition. Explain why it is possible
to represent this preference using the real numbers if we concern ourselves
with only preferences for moments of life or for moments of death throes.
2-2. The Maximin Rule
Using ordinal utility functions we can formulate a very simple rule for making
decisions under ignorance. The rule is known as the maximin rule, because it
tells the agent to compare the minimum utilities provided by each act and choose
an act whose minimum is the maximum value for all the minimums. In brief,
the rule says maximize the minimum.
Example. In table 2-2 the minimums for each act are starred and the act
whose minimum is maximal is double starred.

26

2-2

Si

S2

A!

5

0*

0*

2

A2

-1*

4

3

7

A}

6

4

4

1*

**A4

5

6

4

3*

S3

S4

