The Routledge Handbook of Causality and Causal Methods

15.5

A second implication of the theory: Biological individuality based on
closure of constraints and a processual view of life

Let us turn now to a second point. A theory-based approach to biological individuality grounded
on closure of constraints, as a distinctively biological causal regime, entails a processual view of
living systems, as it assumes an inseparability between what living systems are – their “being”,
individuality, identity – and what they do – their “doing”, as reflected in their metabolism, without which they cannot be, as they are not able to self-maintain (Jonas, 1966/2001; Moreno &
Mossio, 2015). To assume a processual view on living systems (see, e.g., Nicholson & Dupré,
2018) does not entail that we can simply avoid the whole issue with individuality, since it is still
the case that to understand living phenomena, including causal understanding, we will need to
somehow individuate biological individuals standing in relation to one another, even if they are
conceived as just bunches of coexisting processes in time and space for a given (and variable)
period. We can indeed explain what are individuals in terms that do not enter into tension with
a processual view. As Dewey (1938: 135) writes, “To remain and endure is a mode of action”.
Biological individuals can be conceived as coexisting processes that remain temporarily and
spatially interconnected and cohesive (to different degrees), such that we can identify them as
enduring as systems for a given temporal span, while they are constantly traversed by processes
that cross the boundaries between their inner medium and their external environments, up to a
point in which they reach the limit of their self-maintenance as living systems. Biological individuals, while enduring, undergo modification. Accordingly, “continuity is not bare repetition
of identities” (Dewey, 1938: 245), such that to diachronically ascribe individuality we need to
reidentify the same biological individuals in different time-slices.
We can consider, then, a difficulty related to ascertaining biological individuals based on
closure of constraints, which results from their dynamics across time. Biological systems are in
constant flow, they are always crossed by various fluxes, their parts are constantly replaced by
other parts that are in some sense (functionally) equivalents, among other dynamical aspects.
How can we accommodate these dynamics while individuating and identifying living systems
based on closure of constraints?
We need to deal, in short, with a fundamental issue related to identity, namely, that it
can be ascertained both in a single time-slice (synchronically) and across time, in successive
time-slices (diachronically) (Boniolo & Testa, 2012; Huneman, 2014a). No matter how one
conceives of identity, along the spectrum from more stringent to more inclusive interpretations discussed by Montévil and Mossio (2020), one can investigate both whether, say, a given
organism meets the criteria of membership to a reference class here and now, and whether it
keeps complying with them over time. The more stringent the definition of identity, the more
restrictive the reference class, and the less it tolerates changes across time.
Then, a first point to consider is that an account of biological individuals based on closure
of constraints is rather inclusive, and, thus, while it may seem synchronic in nature, it is not
so, and, accordingly, does not leave aside living systems’ diachronic changes. To put it shortly,
the theory of biological autonomy has resources to deal with diachronic individuality. Firstly,
the relations between constraints subject to closure involve time, as explicitly shown in the
different time scales in which the very constraints are defined. An important aspect of the
theory of biological autonomy is that it explicitly includes in its theoretical treatment that not
all entities (or configurations) involved in closure, i.e., constraints, as well as their causal interactions among themselves and with processes, relate to the same time scales. This is relevant
because this temporal aspect of living organization is not often sufficiently recognized. The
relevant opposition between diachronic and synchronic in this case is not, therefore, between
12

