56

Women in the History of Philosophy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026925 Published online by Cambridge University Press

but shaped by habit. Habits may be individual or collective, instilled
by someone’s work, newspaper reading, or engagement with their religious community or by their whole culture. No person is without habits
of thought and ‘emotional tendencies’ (Stebbing, 1939: 33), nor without views shaped to an extent by their wider culture. Habits shaped by
culture can be positive, for example when a teacher can ‘create those
mental habits that will enable his students, or pupils, to seek knowledge and to acquire the ability to form their own independent judgment
based upon rational grounds’ (Stebbing, 1939: 89). Still, some habits
tend in the opposite direction: our cultures may lead us astray or tempt
us towards mental habits which are ‘lazy’ (Stebbing, 1939: 92). But by
teaching ourselves good habits of reasoning, we can learn to overcome
any lazy, dishonest, or overly emotional cultural conditioning, as well
as learn to dispense with stale habits of thought which do not serve us
well.
Among Stebbing’s examples of inculcating good habits of reasoning in
oneself is to recognise the fallacy of special pleading: to endorse a general
principle but refuse to apply it to some particular case, especially one’s
own case. Stebbing quoted from a letter to The Times by a Dr Lyttleton,
who argues that poverty is good for children: ‘they learn by ten years of
age that there is more joy in service than in sweets; more interest in the
welfare of others than in their own’ (Dr Lyttleton, The Times, 7 October
1936, quoted in Stebbing, 1939: 45). Stebbing commented,
You will probably have guessed that he is a man who has not himself
been brought up in a poor family . . . Does he seriously believe – we
should ask him – that it would have been a moral advantage to his own
family had he been poor? If he assents, then he ought in consistency to
wish that he had given up his income, worked hard for a low wage, and
lived in a poor, over-crowded neighbourhood. If, on the contrary, he
is unwilling to apply the principle to the case of his own family, then
he has fallen into a serious logical confusion . . . A safeguard against
this mistake is to change you into I. (Stebbing, 1939: 45–6)

Here, Stebbing can be found recommending to the reader the mental habit of checking whether they would feel the same about a
given situation if they imagine it applying to themselves instead of
others.

