https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026925 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Susan Stebbing

15

associated with moral virtues of peacefulness, piety, and purity (Laslett &
Brenner, 1989: 387). Men ruled the public sphere, which included higher
education as well as politics and the marketplace, a sphere decidedly
less shot through with moral virtue and imbued with the kind of worldly
knowledge from which women were shielded. Although I shall concentrate on Stebbing’s largely white and upper/middle-class British context,
I note that cultural variations existed. In particular, some ethnic minority
groups within Western societies, such as African American communities, largely adhered to Victorian ideals of domesticity but highly prized
women’s education (Carlson, 1992: 61–2), and working-class communities of all ethnic groups valued women’s paid work outside the home,
which they did not view as being at odds with domesticity (Laslett &
Brenner, 1989: 389).
Politics, academic and practical, was described as an essentially masculine enterprise, especially by opponents of women’s suffrage. Antisuffragists seized upon the doctrine of separate spheres to argue that
involvement in politics would erode women’s pure, instinctive virtue.
They justified their opposition to women’s suffrage on the grounds that
women were not suited to politics because emotion, not reason, informed
women’s morality. Anti-feminists argued that while feminine, instinctive morality was well-suited to child-rearing and the domestic sphere,
it had no role to play in the cold, calculating world of politics, where
women would invariably ‘consider personalities above principles’ when
they cast their votes or became involved in governing (Hopkins, 1913: 8).
According to the doctrine of separate spheres, women’s moral superiority
did not issue from rational reflection or knowledge of ethical theory. It
flowed from motherly love, self-sacrifice, and domesticity. Western Victorian and Edwardian cultural mores mostly did not encourage women to
study or teach moral theory in colleges or universities. And they viewed
women as outright incompetent in the realm of politics, a competitive
field drawing upon quite unfeminine worldly knowledge. Logic, by contrast, whether Aristotelian or mathematical, could be studied from home
or entirely within the safe walls of a women’s college. As a result, it
was considered, by those who approved of women’s higher education
but upheld separate spheres, as a safe subject for a woman to study.

