Best Explanations, Natural Concepts, and Optimal Design

209

long believed that modern science would be able to provide the requisite
explanation, by discovering the micro-essence of each natural kind—
appealing to shared DNA, or molecular structure, or atomic number, or
what have you—and that this micro-essence would account for the kind’s
phenomenal properties which made us consider it to be natural. But this
project did not go quite as expected. The micro-essentialist answer that
science appeared to give proved contentious under scrutiny. For instance,
while we regard cows to constitute a natural kind, the bovine genome is
not fixed once and for all but is subject to changes, due to evolutionary
pressures (Ghiselin, 1987; Dupré, 1993; Sterelny & Griffiths 1999). And
the claim that water is H2O is a gross simplification; in reality, water is
a mixture of H2O, D2O, and a number of other isotope combinations of
hydrogen and oxygen (van Brakel 1986, 2005; Needham 2000, 2011;
Weisberg 2005). Such considerations led Churchland (1985, 12 f) to
conclude that natural kind concepts are much sparser than had been
generally believed and only concern fundamental physical entities and
quantities, like neutrons, quarks, charge, mass, and momentum.
But adopting such a minimalist stance vis-á-vis natural kind concepts
robs realism of much of what had made it intuitively appealing. Indeed,
biological and chemical kinds serve as the primary examples of natural
kinds in Putnam (1975) and Kripke (1980), two publications pivotal in
rekindling twentieth-century philosophers’ interest in the realism debate.
And color concepts figure prominently as examples of (what she calls)
natural categories in Rosch (1973), which has been highly influential in
psychology.
On the other hand, Leslie (2013) musters a vast amount of evidence
from developmental psychology indicating that our essentialist intuitions
may well be due to inchoate cognitive biases and may thus “reflect only
facts about us, not facts about the deep nature of reality” (p. 158). Perhaps we simply have to get over the failure of the micro-essentialist program and learn to live with something like Churchland’s minimalism.
However, contemplation on the role natural kind concepts play in
science may stir more serious concerns about Churchland’s position. A
metaphysical idea that guides science and that, according to many, is at
the same time buttressed by the instrumental success of science, is that of
a world hierarchically organized, where the different levels of organization are not only internally structured—into biological kinds, chemical
kinds, physical kinds, and so on—but also interlock in systematic ways,
via causal, functional, and part-whole relationships. Darden and Maull
(1977) point out the vital importance of these interrelations for the practice and, ultimately, the success of science (see, in the same vein, Shapere
in Callebaut, 1993, p. 159 ff). The role these interrelations play in science
would be difficult to make sense of if we were realists about physical
kinds, perhaps, but then were to side with the nominalists on biological
and chemical kinds and hold that these are mere arbitrary groupings.

