The Intricate Conjunction, Coexistence, Competition

27

use the word “purpose” to explain how neutrons enable protons to coexist in the same nucleus despite having mutually repulsive charges. More
physicists use the word “function” and many use the phrase “the role of
neutrons is to . . .” Talking about “roles” seems to have emerged as a way
of implying a purpose without appearing to do so explicitly.
Protofunctions may also be cognitively natural explanations in the
domain of institutional kinds that emerge implicitly in a group without
their awareness (e.g., a subtle greeting ritual, Noyes & Keil, 2020). People may reliably infer explanatory “fits” with certain kinds of real-word
categories. How much this varies across individuals remains an open
question. Some borderline cases may show the most variations, such as
seeing crystals growing and reproducing through a process akin to natural selection (Rosenberg, 2020).
Teleological explanations are scientifically odd to most professional
biologists but may seem more acceptable when endorsing some version
of intentional design for the living world. Teleological explanations are
most natural for artifacts since intentional design of properties seem to
follow automatically. They may actually not follow for all properties of all
artifacts, however. Thus, the “spandrels” found in some forms of classical
architecture may be extolled as clever innovations when in fact they were
inevitable forms that followed geometrically from intentional junctions
of round columns with arches (Gould & Lewontin, 1979). Teleological
explanations clash with most NLNKs in scientific practice and are relatively rare in folk explanations of NLNKs in comparison to living kinds.
Even the most devout might not see a deity as bothering to carefully plan
out all the properties of the nonliving world, such as the distributions
of sizes of grains of sand. For institutional kinds, teleological-functional
explanations are especially natural in cases where a group intentionally
implements such a process, such as a legal system and its entities and
agents, to fill certain roles in their society (Noyes & Keil, 2020).
Constitutive real time mechanistic explanations seem perfectly natural for living kinds and most artifacts (e.g., those with moving parts
or obvious chained cycles), but they seem surprisingly awkward with
many nonliving natural kinds, often because the ongoing process is nonobvious. What is a constitutive real-time mechanistic explanation for
an icicle? Possibly some sense of what factors maintain their structural
integrity over some time interval, but since they often melt slowly and
unpredictably, such an explanation seems mismatched. It may be somewhat better with cases like the geysers mentioned earlier.
Constitutive extended time ontogenetic explanations seem natural for
living kinds and artifacts. It is difficult to imagine cases where it is not
possible in principle to explain how typical individual members of the
kind emerge from complete nonexistence to the present state. Constitutive extended time ontogenetic explanations seem stranger for NLNKs

