142 World politics and the future of politics

to drive today’s decision-makers to give up the present arrangements with global
threats (the nuclear deterrence regime, the regime of voluntary emissions cuts) for
a truly new governance of those threats. Cost-benefit analysis is, for many reasons, a
poor oversimplification of these complex existential questions, but is still prevailing
in the mentality of politicians: applied by people led by (enlightened) self-interest it
would never lead – and it has in fact not led – to costly decisions in favour of a different nuclear and climate governance. Let us see why.
Change is costly in more than one regard. Leaving the deterrence regime to an
authority capable to oversee disarmament and to keep residual nukes locked up
may be regarded as a sacrifice of one’s own security for an uncertain new regime.
Agreeing on mandatory and enforced emissions reduction, as it may become necessary in the likely case that voluntary reductions fail to slow down the warming of
the atmosphere, means not only losing one point of GDP per year, but restructuring technology and economy in a low-carbon key.Taking upon ourselves these and
other costs is justifiable not out of any version of self-interest, but only if we put the
interest of the generations of the far future in the lead, since they would be severely or
tragically damaged if we do not perform a radical change. But why should we do
so? Not out of supererogatory generosity extended to dwellers of future centuries,
but because we the contemporaries (as well as our forefathers since 1850 in the
case of global warming) have, by our very own actions and omissions, prejudiced
the life conditions of those generations in a measure we would by no means accept
for us or our grandchildren, and because we are informed about this causal link.
Between us (or any generation behaving like ours has done so far) and posterity a
relationship like that between plaintiff and defendant in tort law can be assumed to
exist, with the obvious difference that the plaintiff does not yet exist and his or her
interest has to be protected by ourselves as stewards of global commons. Whether
or not we are going to take the step from business-as-usual to the representation of
future generations damaged by our behaviour is a moral and philosophical question we have to decide ourselves; there is no superior judge sentencing us to bear
responsibility for the damages we have possibly inflicted upon the global commons
that will be inhabited by future generations.
Leaving all similarity with legal procedures aside, the reasons for taking that step
require reconnecting politics (an eventual new course addressing global challenges)
with philosophy and morality (which motivations for including future generations
among those whose interests politics is bound to protect?). Politics has, at its best,
come to regard the interests and rights of all present dwellers of the planet as worth
being protected (space universalism). The step to be taken would recognise the equal
dignity of future dwellers: time universalism. To do so, two difficulties are to be hurdled: on the cognitive level, it is difficult to consider persons of the future as similar
and close to us, therefore as possible addressees of either our obligation or empathy.
This is a cultural and psychological question that no persuasion strategy can target;
only good novels such as Cormac McCarthy’s The Road (2006) and good movies
such as Stanley Kramer’s On the Beach (1959) can stimulate our moral imagination
in that direction.

