getting cancer, and that is why the probability of getting cancer, given that you
smoke, is irrelevant to the decision whether to smoke. In the counterexamples
to Counterfactual Decision Theory, the backtracking evidence reveals that
there is a causal connection. All the examples reinforce the idea that causation
is central, ignored at our peril, in a theory of decision. It is what is likely to be
brought about by my action that matters.
A properly causal decision theory should be up-front about causation (like
causal theories of other things). We need conditional judgments like “If I do x,
that will bring it about that C (or cause, or produce as a result, or have as an
outcome, that C). More cautiously: “If I do x, that will contribute to the
bringing about that C.”
We have also seen a reason to go for conditional probabilities rather than
probabilities of some sort of conditional proposition. The latter might get most
of its probability from the case in which the antecedent is false, and that gives
us no reason to act on it.
We need to assess the probability, on the assumption that I do x, that C will
be a causal consequence.
Let’s try to see how this idea works out in the three kinds of case we have
considered. Return to the smoking example used to illustrate Jeffrey’s case
against the Marlboro man (see pp. 2–3). Again, let the values be:

V (Long Life and Smoke) = 11; V (Short life and Smoke) = 1.
V (Long life and Quit ) = 10; V (Short life and Quit ) = 0.
Long life = making it to your 70th birthday; short life = not making it to your
70th birthday. Cases (1), (2), and (3) are: the ordinary causal case, the Fisher
case, and the Egan case.
I suggest that the weights should be something like:
(a) p(Short life as a result of smoking|Smoke)
(b) p(Not (short life as a result of smoking)|Smoke)
(c) p(Long life as a result of quitting|Quit)
(d) p(Not (long life as a result of quitting)|Quit)

(1)
0.6
0.4
0.8
0.2

(2)
0
1
0
1

(3)
0.6
0.4
0.8
0.2

First, in the ordinary case in which smoking tends to shorten life, let the
probabilities be as they were above: (a) 0.6 and (b) 0.4; (c) 0.8 and (d) 0.2, and
we get the same answer as before: It is rational to quit.
In the Fisher case—the pure common cause case (a) is close to 0 (c) is close
to 1; (c) is close to 0 (d) is close to 1; for simplicity, pretend that they are 0 and
1. (a) = (c) (b) = (d). Then as V(Long life and Smoke) exceeds V(Long life
and quit), it is rational to smoke.
In an Egan-style smoking case,19 the agent believes that a desire to smoke is
produced by a genetic condition which also causes one’s lungs to be vulnerable
to cigarette smoke, such that smoking causes cancer in those with the genetic
19. The example occurs in Egan (2007): 103.

84
© 2011 The Author. Journal compilation © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

