war and we have no arms, we’ll be living under an abhorrent regime but that’s
better than the (near) extinction of human life. If there’s peace, and we have no
arms, things are better than peace with arms. Either way, it’s better to disarm.
The believer in deterrence replies that there is much more likely to be war if we
disarm than if we don’t, and the expected value of keeping the weapons is
higher than the expected value of disarming. The details are like that of the
Marlboro man above.
So in general, for Jeffrey, where O1, . . . On are the alternative possible outcomes of some possible action, A,

V ( A ) = p (O1 A )V (O1 &A ) + . . . + p (On A )V (On &A ) .
Note that the theory uses the conditional probabilities of outcome given
action, in calculating the expected value of an action.

Counterexamples to Jeffrey’s Decision Theory
Newcomb’s far-fetched example (see Nozick3) will be discussed, in a revised
version, later, but in honor of its originality, some less far-fetched examples
have come to be known as “medical Newcomb cases.” Here is one. The
statistician Sir Ronald Fisher put forward the hypothesis that the correlation
between smoking and cancer was not to be explained by the fact that smoking
causes cancer, but that a certain genetic condition causes both cancer and the
sort of nervous disposition which inclines one toward smoking. That is,
smoking and cancer are effects of a common cause, like barometer readings
and rain, or spots and fever, but one doesn’t cause the other. Suppose that were
true. The conditional probability of getting cancer, given that you smoke, may
still be considerably higher than the conditional probability of getting cancer,
given that you don’t smoke (because smoking is a sign that you have the bad
gene). But this is no longer a reason not to smoke. You either have the gene or
you don’t, and refraining from smoking isn’t going to reduce your chances of
getting cancer. Fisher’s hypothesis was, alas, false, but far from unthinkable,
and its structure is clear. Another more plausible example: Eating chocolate is
correlated, in susceptible people, with getting migraine headaches, but it might
well not be a cause. Rather, a craving for chocolate might be a side effect of
pre-migraine tension—again an effect of a common cause. So the probability
of getting a migraine, given a craving for chocolate, is high—but on the
“common cause” hypothesis this is not a reason to resist the chocolate: Nothing
you can do now can change your chances of getting migraine. In no way does
it depend causally on your eating chocolate.
Jeffrey’s decision theory gives the wrong answers. Jeffrey’s theory works fine
when the conditional probabilities are grounded in beliefs about appropriate
causal connections, but not when they are grounded in beliefs about joint
effects of a common cause.
3. R. Nozick, “Newcomb’s Problem and Two Principles of Choice,” in N. Rescher (ed.), Essays in
Honor of Carl G. Hempel (Reidel, 1970), 114–5.

77
© 2011 The Author. Journal compilation © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

