428

Previously Published Articles

might well countenance a pair set (in its sense) precisely matching the satisfaction predicate of that previous formal language but not matching its
own satisfaction predicate. Satisfaction for the first language will thus be
directly definable by (3) in the second language, not just inductively; and
similarly for truth. The analogy between a hierarchy of epsilons and a hierarchy of truth predicates thus turns out to be by no means mere. They are
of a piece.
In his early version of his theory of types, mentioned at the end of §3,
Russell sought to block the paradoxes both of truth and of membership by
decreeing a single complex hierarchy of predicates. The scheme was vague
and cumbersome. It was subsequently sharpened and simplified for purposes of set theory by dispensing with the truth aspect as extraneous to set
theory. And now we see a new interlocking of the membership hierarchy
with the truth hierarchy, along clean-cut lines and for clear but subtle reasons that could not be foreseen in Russell’s day.
We can picture the hierarchy of membership predicates and the hierarchy of truth predicates as embraced within a single inclusive language. If
we do, we must beware of assuming that the truths at each level constitute
a set, a class; for that could enable us to define a single comprehensive
truth predicate after all, by quantifying over those classes.
Alternatively, we can picture a hierarchy of languages, each with its
unique membership predicate and a unique truth predicate for the next
lower language. This approach has an important mathematical application
in establishing relative strengths of formal systems. One system is proved
to be stronger than another by interpreting its predicates in such a way
as to be able to define, within it, the truth predicate of the other system.

7. Excluded Middle
Pilate was probably not the first to ask what truth is, and he was by no
means the last. Those who ask it seek something deeper than disquotation,
which was the valid residue of the correspondence theory of truth (§2). Yet
there is surely no impugning the disquotation account; no disputing that
‘Snow is white’ is true if and only if snow is white. Moreover, it is a full
account: it explicates the truth or falsity of every clear sentence, with all
the clarity that is enjoyed by the sentence itself. It is even a more than
full account: it imposes a requirement on the truth predicate that is too
strong for any predicate within the language conceived—on pain of contradiction (§3).

