The Sensory Support of Science

329

problem of relating certain natural events, namely the triggering of our
nerve endings, with other natural events, namely our word-mongering
about nature. Neural events on the one hand, vocal events on the other.
Impacts of molecules and light rays upon our nerve endings set off neural impulses that travel to the brain, where they get processed in extravagantly complex and unexpected ways that the neurologists David Hubel,
Torsten Wiesel, and their successors will be continuing to investigate for
the foreseeable future. Stimulations and neural impulses build up speech
habits and other habits in us that continue to be brought into play by subsequent sensory stimulation, through elaborate processes of association or
reinforcement.
Among the myriad manifestations of these largely unfathomed processes, one outcome is a neat correlation between certain ranges of sensory
stimulation and certain sentences. Exploiting these correlations, we can
happily leave all the bewildering intervening processes to the neurologists,
interested though we are bound to be in what they find out about them.
We can limit our consideration of neural events to the superficial ones that
answer directly to the impacts and input from the external world. Enabled
as we are to relate them directly to certain vocal events, we then proceed to
relate these in turn to the rest of the vocal or literary events that make up
cognitive discourse. These latter connections can be drawn in broadly logical rather than neurological terms.
Of the sentences that correspond thus directly to certain ranges of sensory stimulation, one example is “It’s raining”. There are various concurrent triggerings of sensory receptors that warrant an affirmative or negative verdict on this sentence outright, at the time, and regardless of what
we may have been thinking about or experiencing beforehand.
Thus consider, in contrast, the sentence “Inflation continues”. An affirmative verdict on this sentence could be prompted by a current stimulation, perhaps a glimpse at the price of razor blades a few days before.
Again an affirmative verdict on this sentence might be elicited by someone’s query independently of other present sensory stimulation. The assent
could be based on memory of a recent rise in interest rates, or something
else that one remembered from the newspaper.
Sentences like “It’s raining”, for which the concurrent sensory stimulation suffices, I call observation sentences. They are not sentences about
sense data, nor about stimulation, any more than “Inflation continues” is.

