184 CORRELATION AND CAUSALITY

Chap ter 8

MULTIPLE UNMEASURED VARIABLES

185

number of correlations (covariances) between the constructs increases
geometrically. The researcher may desire to specify a structural model
for those relationships. Such models are discussed in the next chapter.
Multiple indicator models with many constructs usually tend
to be highly overidentified. For instance, a model with four
constructs, each with four indicators, with each indicator loading on
only one factor, and no correlated errors has 98 overidentifying
restrictions! For such models a small number of specification errors
can greatly distort the parameter estimates and lack of fit can be
virtually undetectable if one solely relies on the overall F2 test. The
problem is analogous to an overall F test in the analysis of variance.
Since there are so many degrees of freedom on the numerator, the
overall test has low power to detect a few but important differences.
Clearly one must think through the model and explicitly test for
specific sorts of specification error. Failure to do so may often lead to
parameter estimates that are very misleading.
It is not unusual for the structural model to contain a mix of
constructs. Some of the constructs require multiple indicators while
others may not. For instance, the model may contain demographic
variables such as sex, ethnicity, or age. It seems reasonable to argue
that these variables have perfect or near perfect reliabilities: They are
perfect indicators with epistemic correlations of one. How can such
variables be incorporated into multiple indicator models?
The simplest way to do so is to create a factor for each such
measure. Then force the loading of the measure on the construct to be
one and do not give the measure a disturbance. The factor will then
become the measure, and its variance is set to the variance of the
measure. Thus, if the variable is already standardized, the factor will
also be standardized.
Before turning to an example of a multiple construct model, it
should be noted that specification error can be evaluated in a different
manner with three or more constructs. Earlier, consistency of estimates
was defined. It involved comparing the ratio estimates of loadings
determined by the within and between construct correlations. With

three or more constructs consistency can be evaluated by comparing
two sets of between construct correlations. For instance, note that in
Figure 8.6 the ratio of the path from L to X1 to the path from L to X2
equals

U13
U14
U15
U16

U24 = 
U25 = 
U26
U23 = 
The preceding yields six vanishing tetrads only three of which
are independent:

UU24 í U23U14 = 0
UU25 í U23U15 = 0
UU26 í U23U16 = 0
UU25 í U24U15 = 0
UU26 í U24U16 = 0

[8.1]

UU26 í U25U16 = 0

[8.2]

and

Two of the overidentifying restrictions are constraints of homogeneity
first between L and A (Equation 8.1) and second between L and W
(Equation 8.2). The final independent restriction can be called the
consistency of L with W and A. Only when a construct has just two
indicators does it make sense to evaluate consistency with two other
constructs. If there are three or more indicators this form of
consistency follows from both simple consistency and homogeneity
between constructs. In a similar fashion the consistency of A with L
and W and the consistency of W with L and A can be defined.
In Table 8.4 are the correlations between six subtests of the
Iowa Test of Basic Skills for 1501 inner-city children (Crano, Kenny,
& Campbell, 1972) The six tests can be thought of as two indicators of
language usage (capitalization, X1, and punctuation, X2), work skills
(map reading, X3, and use of graphs, X4), and arithmetic (concepts, X5,
and problems, X6).

