COUNTERFACTUALS

5

evident for subjunctives as it is for indicatives.
On the suppositional account, our backward-looking and forward-looking indicative conditional judgements express our degree
of confidence in the consequent on the supposition of the antecedent. With the backward-looking ones, we all have our own idiosyncratic combinations of knowledge and ignorance, and, as Gibbard
(1981) made famous, people can faultlessly come to opposite opinions: there is nothing objective to aim at. For instance, we both start
off knowing that X or Y or Z did it. I discover it wasn’t Y. You discover it wasn’t Z. I accept ‘If not X, Z’ and reject ‘If not X, Y’. You
do just the opposite. All the relevant facts are available, but neither
of us has them all, and we would know if we pooled our information that X did it. The present objective chance that X didn’t do it is
zero, so there is no such thing as the present objective chance of Y
supposing that not X (just as there is no such thing as an objective
chance that you will pick a spotted ball if you pick a red ball, when
there are no red balls in the bag). For many forward-looking indicatives, by contrast, it is not yet determined whether the antecedent is
true (or at least we treat it as not yet determined, not yet knowable,
whether the antecedent is true), and there may be such a thing as the
objective conditional chance of C given A for our judgements to aim
at. And after the event, should it turn out that not A, we can be
right or wrong when we say that, very likely, C would have happened if A had—very likely, you would have picked a spotted ball if
you had picked a red ball (assuming now that there were some red
balls in the bag). Thus, I hope, we get a fundamentally unified account of conditional judgements, which also explains interesting
differences between the different kinds. Of course we may be certain
that if A, C, but typically we are not, and conditional probability—
the probability of C on the sup-position that A—is, I claim, the key
to how close to certain we are of a conditional of any kind. For subjunctive conditionals, this conditional probability does not (normally) represent your current degree of belief in C given A, but (most
typically) your view about how likely it was that C would have happened, given that A had.2
Pairs like the following have been supposed to force a separate
2

The provisos are there because (a) sometimes, about the future, it might be a matter of
indifference whether you say ‘If it rains…’ or ‘If it were to rain…’; and (b) not every context
shift away from your actual epistemic state is a temporal one: ‘Suppose Euclidean geometry
had been true of the actual world …’

©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00233.x

