192

P. Huneman

some trait, since this fact is equivalent to the causal relevance of selected traits in
their own frequency increase (S).
There is here one last ambiguity left: what exactly is causal, and are we speaking
of ‘‘causation’’ or ‘‘causal relevance’’? In fact (S) talks of causal relevance of traits,
whereas (Q) talks of selection as ‘‘a cause’’, and they proved to be equivalent. It is
crucial here to distinguish between degrees of generality: the causal relevance of a
trait in its increase in frequency is an instance of a very general causal scheme,
which is the dependence of the population-level fate of traits (alleles) upon their
nature and effects. To say that there is ‘‘selection for x’’ means exactly such causal
relevance of trait x. ‘‘Natural selection’’ is, on the other hand, the causal scheme
under which all cases of ‘‘selection for x’’ fall: to say that ‘‘natural selection’’ occurs
means that there is (at least) some x such that there has been selection for x; hence
that such causal relevance holds.38 So in such case, it is true that ‘‘natural selection’’
is the causal scheme responsible of the changing frequency of the traits, so it is
indeed a cause of such fact. But the emphasis on the causal talk will depend on the
context, i.e. on which effect is considered (e.g. asking whether a trait is an
adaptation for some environmental demand, vs. testing a genomic sequence for the
signature of selection).

5 Conclusion
I claim that selection is both causally and explanatory relevant (rather than being
shorthand for infinitely numerous individual causal processes). This commits me to
a counterfactual view of causation, relating facts and properties rather than events.
Since causation is not to be thought as causal process, the distinction between
processes and pseudo-processes (Salmon 1998; Walsh 2001), essential in the
process account of causation, is of no help to understand natural selection. Although
selection is not a force—except by a remote analogy—the statistical view is not
wholly accurate for several reasons, mostly because the elementary properties of
natural selection cannot be thought as state variables like entropy, which are solely
predictors. I insisted on the counterfactual view of causation because otherwise, if
one holds a process view of causation, one cannot resist the statistical conclusion
about selection, namely that the only causal properties are at the level of individual
interactions between organisms, because there are actually no other processes—as
Matthen and Ariew (2009) rightly asserted. The statisticalist view is indeed right in
many aspects: the inseparability of selection and drift at the individual level, the
impossibility of considering selection as a force or superadded causation over and
38

Lewens (2009) pointed out that in some cases ‘‘selection for’’ cannot be equated with the force of
selection, based on the variations in fitness values. Yet ‘‘natural selection’’ here is not what he calls ‘‘force
of selection’’, but just the causal scheme subsuming the specific explanations by natural selection for
properties. The full account of this difference needs another paper aiming at distinguishing how selection
differs from drift in each viewpoint. At the most general level, here I agree with Lewens’ conclusion that
defining the nature of selection cannot avoid to specify the explanatory context conditioning which
adaptations occurred, and especially to decide whether one explains rather the ecological context or the
variations in allele frequencies.

123

