184

P. Huneman

of resistance to invasion (adaptive dynamics). Besides, throughout this paper I have
equated selection with increase in relative frequency—but the counterfactual
statement is easily modifiable in order to account for cases of stabilizing selection
where frequency of the trait will not change but variance of the distribution of traits
diminishes. It may suffice to formulate the causal statement in terms of
counterfactual dependency between the value of the xi and the decrease in relative
frequency of the xj with j = i. Stabilizing selection for xi goes like this: ‘‘if the value
of X for those entities had not been xi, then instances of the other many xj would not
have been likely to decrease in frequency.’’
Manipulationnist accounts of causation are built on a counterfactual account of
causation, provided that the notion of ‘‘intervention’’ defines which counterfactual
changes are made upon the value of the variables (Woodward 2003). Riesman and
Forber (2005) argued for an interpretation of selection as a cause based on such
view; clearly their analysis would be compatible with my view, and generally with
any interpretation of the causal status of selection that would rely on the scheme of
difference-making. However, I still prefer the counterfactual interpretation, because
the manipulationist view of selection as a cause is vulnerable to specific
objections.30 Now I still have to show how and why in the case of natural selection
these counterfactual dependencies actually hold, and this will explain why they
make selection differ from drift.
3.2 Possible Worlds: Reliable Factors, Causes and Selection
A counterfactual assertion is, as Lewis pointed out, an assertion about some possible
worlds and their distance from our actual world. Selectionist explanations, when
phrased in counterfactual terms, should indeed embody references to those possible
worlds, and I will show this now. Recall first that not all counterfactuals in
biological contexts express natural selection. If an individual organism is struck by
lightning, the counterfactual ‘‘if it had not been here it would have not been killed’’
holds, yet it is not about natural selection. Why? Because lightning strikes are very
rare circumstances, and hence their effects appear only in small populations. Once
again, lightning or any case of random deletion can kill all the high fitness
individuals if the population is small, but probably not if it is large. Suppose you
have A and A’ types, and their fitness is Wa [ Wa’.31 So it can be the case that the
frequency of A’ becomes higher than the frequency of A because of those random
deletions, but it will probably not be the case in a large population. And if this
indeed obtains (for example if lightning often suppresses lots of As) then we will
30
Lewens (2009) and Walsh (forthcoming) actually emphasized cases of Gillespie fitness, i.e. cases
where defining fitness includes the variance of the trait distribution, and hence changing fitness implies
changing population size, which makes impossible to distinguish an intervention on fitness (hence
selection) and an intervention on population size (hence drift), so that no legitimate intervention, hence no
causation in the manipulationnist sense, can be defined.
31
This is a rather crude model, not even a Fisher-Wright model for single locus diploid population, since
we consider only genotypes and not alleles; all the subtleties of population genetics are here not at stake,
it’s like a population of asexual haploids. However, the conceptual point made here still concerns real
population genetics, because as we saw the values of the variables in the counterfactual statement can be
understood as competing alleles in a one locus model.

123

