16

DOROTHY EDGINGTON

As there was a very low chance that the plane would crash, this
hindsightful counterfactual does not seem to match a rational forward-looking judgement, ‘If you catch the plane you will be killed’.
True, but note that if someone made that forward-looking judgement in advance, albeit without good reason, and I miss the plane
and it crashes, we would be inclined to say she was right! Although
the best-informed and most reasonable opinion to have in advance
is one which matches the objective chance, that does not mean that
the objective chance gives the ultimate verdict on the conditional.
Perhaps the chance that C if A was high, but it turns out that A and
not C. Perhaps the chance is significantly different tomorrow that,
for example, she will be cured if she has the operation. Or perhaps a
chance event like the plane crash switches the verdict.
This example and others like it suggest that the conditional probability we are concerned to estimate, for counterfactuals (and in a
sense the ultimate verdict on some forward-looking wills), is the
chance, at a time when A still had some chance of coming about, of
C given A and any relevant, causally independent, subsequent facts
that have a causal bearing on C. You have the chance back then.
Then you eliminate the ‘no crash’ possibilities and take a probability distribution over the remaining possibilities. It’s still a conditional
probability, but not one that represents a reasonable degree of conditional belief at the earlier time.
Why do we assess them this way? I argue elsewhere (Edgington
2004) that it is these hindsightful counterfactuals that help us to
make inferences to true conclusions: ‘She must have missed her
plane’, someone says, surprised to see me; ‘if she had caught it she
would be dead.’
Bennett also incorporates this kind of case into his refinement of
Lewis’s account of closeness. There are other refinements and complications. I turn now to the case for liberalism: pretty well any acceptable indicative conditional can ‘go counterfactual’ in a suitable
context. Here is an extreme example (borrowed and adapted from
Grice 1989), which concerns a very minimal ground for an indicative.
If the shift to the counterfactual is permissible here, it looks as if it is
permissible, in a suitable context, for any indicative. There is a treasure hunt. The organizer tells me ‘I’ll give you a hint: it’s either in the attic or the garden.’ Trusting the speaker, I think ‘If it’s not in the attic it’s
in the garden.’ We are competing in pairs: I go to the attic and tip off
my partner to search the garden. I discover the treasure. ‘Why did you
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00233.x

