100

Chapter 6

that students are more likely to complete and comprehend them. Lectures
can identify or highlight what is going to appear on the exam; they can
even serve as the primary content ofa course. Lectures also give professors
a chance to express their enthusiasm for their subject and transmit to students some of that passion and interest—which they are less likely to acquire from reading a dry textbook (McKeachie and Svinicki 2014, p. 59).
What might be some drawbacks of the lecture as a tool of instruction?
What are its limitations? And what alternatives can be offered either to replace the lecture as an instructional mode or to supplement and complement it?
First, the lecture, in its pure form, offers no opportunity for the teacher
to know whether students understand what they are hearing or for students to check their understanding with questions. Unless the lecturer
pauses to solicit questions and then responds to them, students cannot ask
the lecturer to clarify the content presented, to provide examples of concepts, or to suggest applications for the information they are absorbing.
Second, the lecture mostly requires students to be passive listeners. Implicitly, it encourages docility and, explicitly, passivity. The lecture form
prevents students from engaging in dialogue, not only with one other but
often with the instructor. The lecture fosters a form of subservience, even
adulation, of students toward their master teacher.

Third, the lecture is a one-way street and a top-down structure. It’s
authoritarian.
Fourth, the lecture format emphasizes the sage on the stage, preempting the chance for the instructor to be the guide on the side. The lecture
prevents the instructor from serving as coach or mentor for students.
And last, the lecture may disadvantage the already disadvantaged, including first-generation students and underrepresented groups, as well as
women students in the many STEM fields in which they remain the minority. Research increasingly indicates that all students benefit from
classes that incorporate active learning and other inclusive approaches,
rather than relying solely on the traditional lecture, but that the benefits
are even more pronounced for these more vulnerable populations (Freeman et al. 2014; Haak et al. 2011; Lorenzo, Crouch, and Mazur 2006).

The lecture, like any proven tool, is not inherently good or bad—it’s
more a question of how and when it’s used. A hammeris great for so many
things, but for fixing a computer? Not so much. When is lecturing the right
tool for the job? What does the lecture enable instructors to do that other
modes of instruction do not? And how do we best implement it? We need
to answer these questions for ourselves, in light of the material we’re teach-

