Introduction

and effectively. We address these and other related pedagogical challenges throughout this book.
For The Craft ofCollege Teaching to be of real use and value to instructors,
however, it needs to speak to the needs of the students who populate their
courses. Just who are the students attending college and university programs today? Many of them are first-generation higher education attendees. Some are veterans, and many have jobs and support families. We now
see among our students more of those with disabilities and mental health
challenges, more

LGBTQ students, more women, more Latinx students,

and more students for whom English is not their native language. They include commuters, transfers, and international students. The new normal

in college and university classrooms is now a wide range of students representing a broad and diverse population.
We are long past the time when students made up a homogeneous
group of any kind in our classrooms. A significant challenge for teachers,
therefore, is maximizing the benefits of a diverse student population while
addressing their pedagogical needs. The first thing to note is that diversity as a concept is itself diverse. We need to think about the diversity of
diversity—the many ways in which our students differ among themselves
in gender, race, and ethnicity; in their social and cultural backgrounds; in

their academic experience and preparation; and in the ways in which their
varied prior learning experiences accentuate these and other differences
when they enter our classrooms.
These kinds of diversity suggest that we need to know our students—
to learn who they are and how they learn—so that we can motivate them
and use productive teaching strategies with them. We need to figure out
how to welcome their range of differences and create a space where diverse
perspectives, ideas, and values can be accommodated and validated.
This openness speaks to a fundamental principle of teaching: the importance of creating an environment in which all students feel included
and are confident in presenting their ideas and conveying their feelings,
and in which all voices can be heard.
To accommodate this diverse array of students we need to do a number of things. We need to provide special support for non-native speakers
and include course materials that reflect the diversity of students’ linguistic and cultural backgrounds. We need to introduce forms of community
engagement, including service learning. We need to lecture less and use
techniques of active, engaged learning more. We need to get to know students’ needs and concerns and to establish clear classroom policies that

