type and any expression E of type () (i.e., any formula), ∀v E and ∃v E will be
expressions of type (). But the rule for forming complex expressions will be a
little different. The old rule for functionally typed expressions looked like this:
If E1 , . . . , En are expressions of types a1 , . . . , an , and E is an expression of
type 〈a1 , . . . , an , b 〉, then E(E1 , . . . , En ) is an expression of type b
whereas the new rule for relationally typed expressions looks like this:
If E1 , . . . , En are expressions of types a1 , . . . , an , and E is an expression
of type (a1 , . . . , an ), then E(E1 , . . . , En ) is an expression of type ().

This new language is in many ways similar to the language introduced at
the end of section 5.2.2, though not perfectly so. Each language has names,
formulas, sentential connectives, quantifiers, n-place first-order predicates for
each n, n-place second-order predicates for each n, and so on. (Notice that in
most cases, these expressions are assigned different-looking types in the two
systems. For instance, formulas are of functional type t , but relational type ();
one-place predicates are of functional type 〈e, t 〉, but relational type (e); binary
sentential connectives (like ∧) are of functional type 〈t , t , t 〉, but relational type
((), ()).) But the functional language has some additional expressions without
direct counterparts in the relational language. For example, only the functional
language has one-place predicate-functors (i.e., expressions that combine with
one-place predicates to form one-place predicates; i.e., expressions of type
〈〈e, t 〉, 〈e, t 〉〉; i.e., adverbs). The relational language lacks such expressions
because every complex relational type is that of an expression which, when
combined with appropriate other expressions, produces a formula, whereas
predicate-functors combine with predicates to produce predicates.
So there is a sense in which functional types are “syntactically more expressive”
than relational types: on the natural way of associating types with syntactic
categories, relational syntactic categories are a proper subset of functional
syntactic categories. But in a way this is superficial, since there is a sense in
which relational types are just as semantically expressive as functional types. See
Dorr (2016, Appendix 2) for details, but the basic idea is that we can use a
trick akin to schönfinkelization to simulate the meanings of, e.g., predicate
functors with relationally typed expressions. Given the semantics of section
63

