Protocol Study Exemplar

83

Just looking at this it occurs to me that when force is applied here [he draws a
downward pointing arrow at the end of the line segment], you not only get a bend
on this segment, but because there’s a pivot here [points to the “X” in figure 3.14,
number 11], you get a torsion effect—around here [points to the adjacent segment].
(121)

That is, he inferred that there would be a twisting in the segments—producing a torsional strain in the wire—from mentally simulating the motion
of the open segment of the horizontal coil in the dynamical case where
the force from the weight operates on the coil oriented in the horizontal
plane (as annotated with arrows in the drawing). He quite likely drew on
his knoweldge of physics at this point, in calling the twisting at the joint
a “torsion effect.” He went on:
Aha!—Maybe the behavior of the spring has something to do with the twist forces”
[Clement 2005, 3, records that S2 moved his hands as if twisting an object, and
continued to make either twisting or bending motions as the reasoning about the
polygonal coil model unfolded.] That’s a real interesting idea—That might be the
key insight—that might be the key difference between this [flexible rod], which
involves no torsion, and this [hexagonal coil]. (122)

As Clement characterized this aha! moment, here S2 has made “a major
breakthrough in the solution,” which can be viewed as a significant scientific insight because “by considering torsion the subject introduces a new
causal factor into the system. Torsion constitutes a very different mechanism from bending for explaining how the spring resists stretching”
(Clement 1988, 366). My interpretation adds that rotating the coil into the
horizontal plane offers a three-dimensional perspective that affords a novel
simulation that literally exhibits the twist, thus leading to his inference
that for the spring the mechanism of stretch is torsion.
Moving on, S2 then constructed a square coil version of a polygonal coil
model (figure 3.14, number 12) in order to accentuate the torsion effect,
and he considered the possibility that torsion is what “stops the spring
from—from flopping” (126). Exploring the properties of this model convinced him that unlike the initial rod model, this hybrid satisfies the
uniform slope constraint T9. Both the hexagon and the square models
incorporate features of the rod because straight line segments will bend.
But the right angle of the square model means that both twisting and
bending “start over again” (122) at each of the joints, rather than accumulating. Torsion does not accumulate, but
distributes itself equally across all the joints [ . . . ] so the twist doesn’t get more
[ . . . ] indeed we have a structure here which doesn’t have this increasing slope at
the bottom. (130)

