462

J. Otsuka

change in the mean growth rate in terms of the variance of relative growth rates, or
 ¼ Var(W)= 
DW
W, where the growth rate W of each type (e.g., allele) in the
population measures the increase or decrease of its share in the next generation.
Another example is the Price equation DZ ¼ Cov(Z, W)= 
W, which expresses the
change in the phenotypic mean Z in terms of the covariance of the phenotype Z and
the fitness (i.e., the number of offspring) W divided by the mean fitness 
W. It is well
known that the Price equation is an algebraic truth that holds just in virtue of the
axioms of probability theory and the definitions of the mean, covariance, and the
variables used therein.1 The same is true of Li’s theorem, which is a special case of
the Price equation obtained by substituting phenotype Z in the Price equation for
fitness or growth rate W and noting the covariance of a variable with itself is its
variance.
If the general principles of evolution are a priori truths, predicting evolutionary
changes is just a matter of algebraic calculation that requires no causal or even
empirical assumption. On this ground statisticalists conclude ‘‘selection is
mathematical in nature, and independent of the particular causal laws that produce
growth’’ (Matthen and Ariew 2002, p. 74). This is not to deny that a selective
episode consists of a host of causal interactions that culminate in individual births
and deaths. The claim is rather that mathematical population genetics abstracts away
all these causal substrates and studies selection as a purely mathematical
relationship that can be described with a priori theorems. ‘‘Li’s theorem tells us
nothing about causes of growth: it is a general truth about growth regardless of how
it is caused’’ (ibid.). Assumptions regarding causal details play no substantive role
in establishing this ‘‘general truth’’ and thus in predicting evolutionary changes—
hence follows the statisticalist doctrine that evolutionary theory is not a causal but
purely statistical theory.
Causalist responses
Critics of the statisticalism have challenged this purely mathematical characterization of population genetics in two ways. The first line of response is to assert that
statisticalists are looking at the wrong place to read off a causal implication of the
theory. Millstein et al. (2009) criticize statisticalists for deriving their conclusion
from the mere fact that selection is expressed by some mathematical formula. The
fact that something can be represented with an a priori equation does not prove its
non-causal nature, they argue, because it is not an equation itself but an
interpretation that gives a causal content. Take their example of a binomial
equation ðp þ qÞ2 ¼ p2 þ 2pq þ q2 ¼ 1. This same equation can be thought of as
representing either genotype frequencies at Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, or the
area of a unit square divided into four rectangles (one square with the size p2 ,
another with q2 , and two rectangles with pq). But the equation itself is silent as to
which of these representations is correct: the representational content of the
equation, and thus whether it represents a causal or physical process at all, is
1

See e.g., Okasha (2006) for a derivation of the Price equation.

123

