474

J. Otsuka

Some causalists have resisted this realist take on population size, pointing out
that scientists reserve the right to choose (the size of) a population to be studied
(Abrams 2013; Ramsey 2013). It is true, or even truism, that scientists can and must
decide on which population they are going to investigate, and their decision surely
reflects varieties of epistemic as well as pragmatic factors such as research interests,
available resource, considerations on statistical power, etc. Abrams cites cases of
selection study on human populations that pooled some subpopulations for the sake
of a greater statistical power. Yet another research group may well prefer a smaller
population due to sparse data or limited resources. Such decisions must be made, but
that’s not the end of the story. They must further be justified vis-a-vis their research
goal, and such justifications can come only from nature. Pooling populations is
allowed only when they are homogeneous (no mixture distribution), and extrapolations from a small population always risk overgeneralization—and all of that
depends on the causal structure. Hence although it is scientists who demarcate the
population to be investigated, whether their decision turns out to be correct is not up
to them.
Before moving, let us note that the statisticalist supposition that a population can
be demarcated in arbitrary ways is a logical consequence of their doctrine that
evolutionary equations are purely mathematical truths. Indeed, nothing prohibits
one from applying the Price equation to a gerrymandered population. Suppose a
‘‘population’’ consisting of all American citizens whose first name start with ‘‘T,’’
all kangaroos living in Queensland, and my three goldfish. Count their descendants
at some later time and the Price equation gives the exact change of any arbitrarily
chosen phenotypic mean, say height (length). This is precisely because the Price
equation, as an a priori mathematical theorem, applies to whatever set of objects as
long as they satisfy certain measurement conditions. This is not true with predictive
evolutionary equations such as the breeder’s equation, whose derivation requires
certain causal assumptions. To apply these equations, a population must be
homogeneous with respect to the causal structure and consistent with the model
assumptions. A causal structure is the unit of evolutionary theory which both affords
and delimits the generalizability of evolutionary equations, and for this reason an
evolving population cannot be demarcated willy-nilly.
Fitness-evolution relationship: causal or identical?
Recall under the interventionist account X counts as a cause of Y if there is an
intervention on X that changes P(Y). Based on this idea the causalists have
suggested that interventions on fitness (Shapiro and Sober 2007; Sober 2013) or on
the population size (Reisman and Forber 2005; Forber and Reisman 2007) affect
adaptive evolution and drift, respectively. In order to establish the causal relation,
however, the hypothetical interventions must satisfy an additional condition:
namely that the intervened variable X and the supposed effect Y cannot be logically
related. Manipulating a man’s marital status would certainly change whether he is a
bachelor or not, but it is not because they are causally related, but rather logically
the same. According to Matthen and Ariew (2009), the same applies to the
interventions proposed by the causalists. Although manipulating, say, the fitness

123

