Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 22 April 2025

392

James T. Costa and George Beccaloni

genetic material, the modern view of genetic variation remains essentially that of Darwin
and Wallace: ubiquitous, mostly small-scale and continuous heritable variants that selection
acts upon.
It is worth noting, ﬁnally, that Wallace’s ﬁnal chapter outline does not stop with a critique
of perceived challenges to Darwinian–Wallacean gradualism. He planned to go on to discuss
how natural selection does not ‘claim to account for’ such profound questions as the origin of
life, or the ‘fundamental forces’ of growth and reproduction. But just what was Wallace’s
intended point here? Did he plan on making a statement about life’s origins, or about the
bearing (or not) of natural selection on (or explaining) life’s origins? The question of the
origin of life, whether by some form of spontaneous generation (abiogenesis) or another
process, has been of great interest ever since the Darwin–Wallace transmutation theory was
announced. Darwin avoided discussing the origin of life publicly, brieﬂy touching on the
question twice in the Origin using language with ( perhaps deliberate) theological
overtones, and hedging his bets as to whether life originated once (‘probably all the
organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one
primordial form, into which life was ﬁrst breathed’) or multiple times (‘There is grandeur
in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed into a few
forms or into one …’).91 In private correspondence a dozen years later, Darwin speculated
on conditions necessary for early life to arise and, just as importantly, persist:
It is often said that all the conditions for the ﬁrst production of a living organism are now
present, which could ever have been present.—But if (& oh what a big if ) we could
conceive in some warm little pond with all sorts of ammonia & phosphoric salts,—
light, heat, electricity &c present, that a protein compound was chemically formed,
ready to undergo still more complex changes, at the present day such matter would be
instantly devoured, or absorbed, which would not have been the case before living
creatures were formed.92

Ecology was key: the absence of heterotrophs at the time that life ﬁrst arose provided an early
window of opportunity for proto-living organisms to persist, after which any arising would
likely be consumed.
Wallace touched on life’s origins in several of his writings. In the 1870s he favourably
reviewed H. Charlton Bastian’s work purporting to demonstrate spontaneous generation of
living from non-living matter, and saw the signiﬁcance of this research: ‘It is not too much
to say that, if its main conclusions are established, it will create a revolution in organic
philosophy of equal importance with that which was effected by Mr. Darwin, whose
observations and most important theories will, however, remain unaffected by it.’93 In later
years Wallace saw the subject through the lens of a spiritualism that became increasingly
theistic. His views around the time of the book outline are perhaps best expressed in the
section ‘A suggestion as to the origin of life’ in his book The world of life (1910), in
which Wallace speculated about the ‘initiation of life’ infused into ‘suitable life-centres’
91 Darwin, op. cit. (note 4), pp. 484, 490.
92 C. R. Darwin to J. D. Hooker, 1 February 1871, Darwin Correspondence Project, ‘Letter no. DCP-LETT-7471’, https://www.
darwinproject.ac.uk/letter/DCP-LETT-7471.xml (accessed 8 March 2023). In this letter Darwin comments on W. T. Thiselton-Dyer,
‘On spontaneous generation and evolution’, Q. J. Microsc. Sci. 10, 333–354 (1870).
93 A. R. Wallace, ‘Bastian on the origin of life’, Nature 4, 178–179 (1871), and ‘Review [of The beginnings of life: being some
account of the nature, modes of origin, and transformations of lower organisms by H. Charlton Bastian, 1872] I.’, Nature 6, 284–287
& ‘II.’, Nature 6, 299–303 (1872); quote from Nature 6, 303.

