Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 22 April 2025

The unrealized ﬁnal book of Alfred Russel Wallace

377

School in Hertford soon after the death of his father, as family ﬁnances worsened. He set off
to work, ﬁrst in London, lodging with and assisting his brother John who was apprenticed to a
master builder, and then in the English–Welsh borderlands as assistant surveyor to his eldest
brother, William, who had a surveying business that was thriving for a time owing to the
expansion of the railways and the new enclosure laws.
One striking and important similarity in their educational experience is the taste both
Darwin and Wallace showed for eclectic reading, especially on scientiﬁc subjects. The
prosperous Darwin home was full of books, and so too was the household of Alfred
Russel Wallace’s youth, facilitated by his father’s sometime position as Hertford town
librarian. Wide reading was an interest both retained into early adulthood and beyond.
Although Darwin later lamented that his time at Cambridge was ‘sadly wasted … and
worse than wasted’,35 he showed enthusiasm for Milton, William Paley and natural history
and related scientiﬁc subjects, so much so that he became known as ‘the man who walks
with Henslow’ in reference to his esteemed botany professor John Stevens Henslow, who,
not coincidentally, played a key role in Darwin’s invitation to join the Beagle voyage.36 At
the time, Darwin was enthralled too with Alexander von Humboldt’s Personal narrative,
and longed to travel in the great naturalist’s footsteps—a book that was also to ﬁre the
imagination of Wallace a few years later. While Wallace did not have the advantage of
access to an extensive university library, he regularly availed himself of mechanics’
institute libraries and free public libraries, then a novelty, as well as free lectures. When in
1844 he was laid off by his brother owing to a downturn in the surveying business,
Wallace took a job in Leicester teaching elementary mathematics, during which time he
undertook lessons in more advanced mathematics by the school master and continued an
eclectic reading programme that included scientiﬁc and literary works. He also befriended
H. W. Bates, who introduced him to insect collecting. Wallace’s self-education continued
after his return to Neath a year later (following William’s death), taking on the surveying
business while frequenting the Neath Mechanics’ Institute and Philosophical Society,
continuing insect collecting and reading increasingly deeply of scientiﬁc works such as
Lyell, Darwin, Humboldt and Malthus.37
Given the striking educational and social differences in his and Darwin’s backgrounds,
Wallace concluded that ‘environment’ was not the determining factor in their coincident
life-work. The implication is that the determining factor (or factors) is constitutional,
hereditary, as becomes clear in his notes for the following chapter. This is consistent with
Wallace’s hereditarian view of human behaviour and mental and moral attributes—and his
concomitant rejection of Lamarckism, the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Such a
hereditarian view underlies Wallace’s early (1864) model of the evolution of humans by
natural selection ﬁrst bodily and then, at a later phase, mentally and morally.38 It also
underlies his later embrace of women’s free choice in marriage as a means of social
improvement—a form of sexual selection by female choice inspired by Wallace’s reading
of American socialist Edward Bellamy, where women’s selection of husbands with the best
traits mentally and morally would help improve society generally as these traits were

35 N. Barlow (ed.), The autobiography of Charles Darwin 1809–1882 (Collins, London, 1958), p. 60.
36 Ibid., p. 64.
37 Wallace, op. cit. (note 7), vol. 1, pp. 87–88, 231–232, 254–256.
38 A. R. Wallace, ‘The origin of human races and the antiquity of man deduced from the theory of “natural selection”’,
J. Anthropol. Soc. Lond. 2, clviii–clxx (1864).

