78

EDITHDAUBNER

original answers to aesthetic questions. In reply, we might say that few
statements have ever been made of what qualifications are necessary
for solving the classic problems of aesthetics. Clive Bell has made some
modest but cogent suggestionson this subject, though.' He says that the
formulator of an aesthetic theory first should have a fund of experience
in creation, performance, or appreciation in one or more of the arts,
and second, should be able to think logically and express ideas clearly.
Bell does not appear to believe that an extensive knowledge of other
fields of philosophy is necessary. His criteria qualified our class to do
original thinking on aesthetic problems, and for this reason we accepted
them.
A brief description of the nature of the class is in order here. There
were sixteen students: nine seniors, four juniors, two sophomores, and
one freshman. Twelve students had taken no philosophy course previously; three had taken a course surveying the history of philosophy;
one had taken courses in both ethics and the philosophy of education.
All sixteen had elected to take this course- as a first philosophy course
for three-fourthsof the class members. (There was no philosophymajor
offered at the college.) Five of the students were art majors and two
were English majors. Four were majoring in social science, one in psychology, one in home economics, and one in Spanish. Six students had
a strong personal interest in creative work in the visual arts; almost all
had an appreciation of one of the visual arts. Eight played a musical
instrument "fairly well," to use their words, and four were interested
enough in writing to write prose or poetry on their own. Almost all
reasoned clearly and expressed their ideas well orally and in writing.
Up to this point, the students had read widely and had been exposed
to a fairly broad spectrum of the traditional views on one specific and
fundamental question: What are the defining characteristics of the
work of art? Working in seminar fashion, with a student appointed
to lead each discussion,the class had studied readings from such authors
as Collingwood, Tolstoy, Plato, Bell, Maritain, Croce, and Sibley. Even
unusual theories had been considered, such as the possibility that no
definition could be given that would cover all types of art and, to take
this one step further, that no definition could be given to cover all art
objects within even one form, such as music. Too, the possibility that
every object might be in some sense a work of art had been discussed.
It was time now to bring the discussionof this particular question to
a close by making a cooperative effort to formulate our own definition
of an art work - either a definition covering all forms of art or a definition relating to one form. But how were we to proceed? The most

This content downloaded from 130.240.43.43 on Tue, 16 Feb 2016 11:15:08 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

