DEFININGART

79

practicable suggestion seemed to be that of Professor Ziff,2 who had
proposed that we should choose a "clear-cut case" of a work of art, an
object generally accepted by competent critics to be a genuine art object, an object which was not "extreme" in any way. We should determine the characteristicsthat set this work apart from nonart works and
consider these qualities, provisionally at least, to be the defining notes
of an aesthetic object.
Professor Ziff had chosen for his representative work a painting,
Poussin'sRape of the Sabine Women, and it was apparent to the class
members, as to him, that the essential characteristics he listed for a
work of art in painting would not apply to other types of art objects,
such as music or literature.: On reading Ziff's article, the class readily
agreed that a different set of characteristicswould have to be worked
out for each form of art. The class could not work with a representative
object in some of these art forms, because it was obvious that a considerable amount of technical training was necessary to attain any understanding at all of such art forms as music or the dance.
The instructor had the task, then, of finding a representative art
work in one of the media that she knew would be familiar to all the
students. The novel, the film, and poetry were all possibilities. But because of the practical difficulties of having all class members read the
same full-length novel or attend the same film, the teacher decided to
choose a poem.
Mindful of Ziffs cautions, she tried to visualize a continuum along
which all works of art with some claim to being poetry could be placed.
At one extreme, she imagined "just-barely-poems,"perhaps so sentimental or banal that they could hardly be included on the continuum.
At the other extreme, she pictured poems of excellence, acknowledged
by competent critics to be brilliant examples of the poetic art, but comprehensibleto only a limited number of readersbecause of some esoteric
element such as sprung rhythm or highly unusual made-up words. Such,
for example, were some of the poems of Gerald Manley Hopkins. Steering a middle course, the instructor chose a sonnet from Untermeyer's
collection Modern American Poetry.4This poem had been described by
H. L. Mencken as "the greatest sonnet since Shakespeare"5and had
been judged by another critic, Saintsbury,to be "the third best sonnet
in the English language."6This sonnet was Tears, written in 1887 by
the Baltimore poetess Lizette Woodworth Reese. It contained no turgid
or strained expressions,no puzzling allusions, no unintelligible figures of
speech, and no peculiarities of rhythm. It was not sentimental. The language used was straightforwardand lucid. The poem had the further

This content downloaded from 130.240.43.43 on Tue, 16 Feb 2016 11:15:08 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

