7.6

The Metaphysics of High and Low

289

thesis provides a metaphysics for a certain kind of law, it will not seem much
like other well-known accounts of laws of nature, because these other accounts primarily concern fundamental laws. (Lewis’s (1973b) best-system
account, for example, is a theory of fundamental laws alone.) Indeed, since
the thesis takes the fundamental laws as its raw material without saying
anything substantive about their nature, it is quite consistent with a range
of views about the essence of fundamental lawhood.
Let me spell out the consequences of the causal-mechanical thesis for an
uncomplicated causal law of the form In conditions Z, all F s are G, understood (as above) as assuming or asserting a causal connection running
from F to G. If the law’s explanatory model contains no basing generalizations, then the law’s sole constituent is the mechanism in virtue of which the
properties specified by the law’s conditions of application Z and antecedent
F causally produce the explanatory target, that is, the instantiation of G.
Such a mechanism is, in effect, a high-level property of the fundamental
laws—you might say that it is nothing over and above those aspects of the
fundamental laws that are essential to establishing the connection from Z
and F to G.
If the high-level law’s explanatory model contains basing generalizations,
then the law has two or more constituents: the basing patterns—the patterns of entanglement—whose existence is asserted by the basing generalizations, and the mechanism connecting the properties specified by the
basing generalizations (and any causes specified explicitly by the law) to the
explanatory target.
Three remarks. First, the causal-mechanical thesis entails that every
law has a distinct explanatory model, that is, that there is a one-to-one
mapping—an injection—from laws to explanatory models. Is this a plausible commitment? In section 7.63, I investigate the consequences of transforming it from a commitment to a stipulation, so creating one part of a
demarcation criterion for laws.
Second, the thesis that laws are identical to their explainers, together with
what I characterized in section 3.23 as the reductionist thesis that the causal
ingredient in all explanation is derived from the fundamental laws, adds
up to the reductionist metaphysics of causal laws that I have championed
throughout this study, on which the laws are in their causal aspect (that
is, aside from their basing patterns) not ontologically distinct from, but
merely high-level properties of, the fundamental physical laws. The impact
of basing generalizations on this explanatory physicalism will be discussed
in section 12.4.

