8.2

Explaining Boyle’s Law

311

tains idealizations, the canonical explanation contains none. A comparison
of the two explanations will reveal the explanatory role of idealization.
One conclusion that will be possible at the end of the presentation of the
canonical explanation, before any particular thesis about the nature of idealization is formulated, is the following: if the distortion of the causal details
perpetrated by the ideal gas explanation of Boyle’s law were corrected—that
is, if the distorted description were replaced by a true description of the
same details—there would be no improvement in the quality of the explanation. In other words, the ideal gas explanation is in no way inferior to its
veridical counterpart.
Suppose, then, that your task is to construct the canonical explanation
of the approximate truth of Boyle’s law. Following the account of regularity explanation developed in chapter seven, you should create a causal
model that has as its explanatory target a gas’s pressure. More exactly, the
target will be a certain aspect of the pressure, namely, its having a magnitude related to the gas’s volume by Boyle’s law, that is, a magnitude
of k/V . Call a gas’s pressure’s conforming to this constraint Boylean behavior.
A model for any aspect of a gas’s pressure represents the causal process
by which a given volume of gas in a given container exerts a given force
on the container walls—the steady bombardment of the walls by the gas’s
molecules. A complete description of this process for a particular gas would
have to document the trajectory of every molecule in the gas. The kinetic
theory of gases allows you to give a statistical description of the process using the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution that is, for all practical purposes,
just as good. Take this statistical description of the bombardment mechanism as your starting point. (I will show in part four why the statistical
description is in fact explanatorily superior to the more complete deterministic description; I will also provide some formal apparatus for constructing
explicitly probabilistic models.)
Having found and described the underlying process or mechanism, the
next step is to prune the mechanism description so that it mentions only
aspects of the mechanism that make a difference to the explanatory target,
that is, to Boylean behavior. This is where the kairetic criterion comes into
its own.
A full description of a gas in modern kinetic theory accommodates all of
the causal complications omitted in the ideal gas model: long-range forces,
collisions, and so on. Include all of these factors in the initial causal model,

