198 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

distinction of facts and ideas, and that valid kn
genuine correspondence or agreement, of some sort, of fact and idea,
is the common and undeniable assumption. But the discussions are
largely carried on in terms of an epistemological dualism which
renders the solution of the problem impossible in virtue of the very
terms in which it is stated. The distinction is at once identified with
that between mind and matter, or consciousness and objects, or the
psychical and the physical, where each of these terms is supposed to

refer to some fixed order of existence, a world in itself. Then, of
course, there comes up the question of the nature of the agreement,
and of the recognition of it. What is the experience in which the
survey of both idea and existence is made and their agreement
recognized? Is it an idea? Is the consistency ultimately a matter

of self-consistency of ideas? Then what has become of the postulate
that truth is agreement of idea with existence beyond idea? Is it an
absolute which transcends and absorbs the difference? Then, once
more, what is the test of any idea qua idea? What has become of

the correspondence of fact and thought? Or, more urgently, since
the pressing problem of life, of practise and of science is the discrimination of the relative, the superior validity of this or that
theory, plan or interpretation, what is the criterion of truth within
present non-absolutistic experience, where the distinction between

factual conditions and thoughts and the necessity of some! working
criterion of their correct adjustment persist? Putting the problem
in yet another way, either both fact and idea are present all the time

or else only one of them is present. But if the former, why should
there be an idea at all and why should it have to be tested by the
fact? When we already have what we want, namely, existence,
reality, why should we take up the wholly supernumerary task of

forming more or less imperfect ideas of those facts and then engage
in the idle performance of testing them by what we already know to

be real? But if only ideas are present, then it is idle to speak of
comparing an idea with facts and testing its validity by its agreement. The elaboration and refinement of ideas to the uttermost still
leaves us with an idea, and to common sense and science while a self-

consistent idea stands a show of being true in a way in which an
incoherent one can not, a self-consistent idea simply as an idea is still
but a hypothesis, a candidate for truth. Ideas are not made true
by getting bigger. But if only 'facts' are present, once more the
whole conception of agreement is again given up-not to mention
that such a situation is one in which by definition there is no thinking or reflective factor at all.

This suggests that a strictly monistic epistemology, whether
idealistic or realistic, does not get rid of the problem. Suppose, for

This content downloaded from
177.249.162.188 on Fri, 23 May 2025 04:30:06 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

