208 The Journal of Speculative Philosophy.
sophical knowledge, be accomplished. Since the for-itself-existing
subjectivity is absolutely identical with the substantial universal
ity, religion as such, and also the State as such?as forms in which
the principle exists?contains the absolute truth, so that this, since
it exists as philosophy, exists only in one of its forms. But since

religion in its own development develops also the distinctions
contained in the idea, so being can appear in its first immediate?
i. e., one-sided?form, and the existence of religion become cor
rupted to sensual externality, and, consequently, further, to the

oppression of the freedom of the spirit and the perversion of
political life. But the principle contains the infinite elasticity of
the absolute form to overcome this corruption of its determination
of form, and. by this means, of the content, and to effect the recon
ciliation of spirit in itself. Thus, at last, the principle of the reli

gions and the moral conscience becomes one and the same in
the Protestant conscience, the free spirit knowing itself in its
reasonableness and truth. The constitution and legislation, like
their working and trial, have for their content the principle
and the development of morality, which proceeds, and only can
proceed, from the truth of religion restored to its original princi
ple, and thus first, as such, real. The morality of the state and the

religious spirituality of the state are thus the state's reciprocal
and sure guarantees.

THE METAPHYSICAL ASSUMPTIONS OF MATE
RIALISM.
BY JOHN DEWEY.

Discussions regarding materialism have been, for the most part,

confined to the physiological and psychological aspects of it. Its
supporters and opponents have been content to adduce arguments
pro or con, as the facts of physical and mental life bear upon the

case in hand. It is the object of the present paper to discuss its
metaphysical phases.
Hume suggested that possibly one might escape from the nihil
istic consequences of his philosophy by means of " the sceptical
This content downloaded from
177.249.162.188 on Fri, 23 May 2025 04:29:54 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

