Copyright The Philosophy of Science Association 2019. Preprint (not copyedited or formatted).
Please use DOI when citing or quoting. DOI: 10.1086/705444

different background theories. Differences in expertise may be associated with erroneous
assumptions, which can be better exposed by people from different backgrounds.
The diversity resulting from these two epistemic mechanisms makes members of a
group better epistemic agents and the group itself more reliable. When collaborators seek out
multiple sources of evidence, it makes their conclusion more robust and well supported. By
having collaborators with different background theories, collaborators are better able to
interrogate and hold each other responsible for their reasoning processes. Philosophers of
science have long argued that a diversity of scientists with different background theories will
be better at exposing problems with each other’s assumptions, reasoning, and justifications
(see Longino 1990, 2002).
When members of an epistemic group disagree over the reasons for their claim, this
disagreement is not immediately bad. If this disagreement is a result of negotiating different
background theories or resolving multiple sources of evidence, then the epistemic group ought
to be nonetheless justified in its conclusion. Diversity in these cases is epistemically valuable
and should be maintained, not eliminated.
Consensus still has important instrumental value in the practice of science. After all,
there would be no disciplinary unity if scientists never came to broad agreement over some
things. However, consensus does not have instrumental value in every stage of science. The
proper place for consensus for scientific collaborations are at the beginning and end. That is,
first, members ought to reach broad agreement over defining the research question, because a
group requires a coherent research question and goal in order to function. And second,

12
This content downloaded from 128.233.210.097 on August 22, 2019 07:32:51 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

