REFERENCE AND DESCRIPTIONS

I might say to his minions, "Is the king in his countinghouse?"
I succeed in referring to the man I wish to refer to without myself
believing that he fits the description. It is not even necessary,
moreover, to suppose that his followers believe him to be the king.
If they are cynical about the whole thing, know he is not the king,
I may still succeed in referring to the man I wish to refer to.
Similarly, neither I nor the people I speak to may suppose that
anyoneis the king and, finally, each party may know that the other
does not so suppose and yet the reference may go through.

V
Both the attributive and the referential use of definite descriptions seem to carry a presupposition or implication that there is
something which fits the description. But the reasons for the existence of the presupposition or implication are different in the two
cases.
There is a presumption that a person who uses a definite
description referentially believes that what he wishes to refer to
fits the description. Because the purpose of using the description
is to get the audience to pick out or think of the right thing or
person, one would normally choose a description that he believes
the thing or person fits. Normally a misdescription of that to which
one wants to refer would mislead the audience. Hence, there is a
presumption that the speaker believes somethingfits the description
-namely, that to which he refers.
When a definite description is used attributively, however,
there is not the same possibility of misdescription. In the example
of "Smith's murderer" used attributively, there was not the possibility of misdescribing Jones or anyone else; we were not referring
to Jones nor to anyone else by using the description. The presumption that the speaker believes someoneis Smith's murderer does not
arise here from a more specific presumption that he believes Jones
or Robinson or someone else whom he can name or identify is
Smith's murderer.
The presupposition or implication is borne by a definite
description used attributively because if nothing fits the descrip29I

