KEITH S. DONNELLAN

when the speaker believes that some particular thing or person
fits the description, and it can be used referentially in the absence
of this belief.
My main point, here, however, has to do with Linsky's view
that because the presupposition is not satisfied, the statement is
neither true nor false. This seems to me possibly correct if the
definite description is thought of as being used attributively
(depending upon whether we go with Strawson or Russell). But
when we consider it as used referentially, this categorical assertion
is no longer clearly correct. For the man the speaker referred to
may indeed be kind to the spinster; the speaker may have said
something true about that man. Now the difficulty is in the notion
of "the statement." Suppose that we know that the lady is a
spinster, but nevertheless know that the man referred to by the
speaker is kind to her. It seems to me that we shall, on the one
hand, want to hold that the speaker said something true, but be
reluctant to express this by "It is true that her husband is kind to
her."
This shows, I think, a difficulty in speaking simply about "the
statement" when definite descriptions are used referentially. For
the speaker stated something, in this example, about a particular
person, and his statement, we may suppose, was true. Nevertheless,
we should not like to agree with his statement by using the sentence
he used; we should not like to identify the true statement via the
speaker's words. The reason for this is not so hard to find. If we
say, in this example, "It is true that her husband is kind to her,"
we are now using the definite description either attributively or
referentially. But we should not be subscribing to what the original
speaker truly said if we use the description attributively, for it was
only in its function as referring to a particular person that the
definite description yields the possibility of saying something true
(since the lady has no husband). Our reluctance, however, to
endorse the original speaker's statement by using the definite
description referentially to refer to the same person stems from
quite a different consideration. For if we too were laboring under
the mistaken belief that this man was the lady's husband, we could
agree with the original speaker using his exact words. (Moreover,
it is possible, as we have seen, deliberately to use a definite descrip300

