24

Agenda

operator in propositional logic that they were instructed on in some course
they took. Including the responses of such participants might yield at
least partial confirmation for the material conditional account, where this
partial confirmation may then well be spurious, possibly only showing
that some participants have satisfactorily memorized their lessons in logic.
Obviously, philosophers would all fall into this category of participants to
exclude in these experiments.
Equally important is the consideration that philosophers working on
conditionals will not only have a background in logic; they will be familiar
with all or almost all semantics for conditionals that have been proposed,
among which they may have their favorite. There is no reason to believe
that philosophers are less susceptible to confirmation bias than other people, which in the present context might amount to giving more weight to
certain of one’s intuitions than to others, or perhaps to reject as irrelevant
all too easily those conditionals which one’s preferred semantics does not
adequately deal with.
As for the accusation of psychologism, it should be remembered that
modern logic was devised to facilitate reasoning in mathematics, and the
language of mathematics is in many respects unlike ordinary language. At
a minimum, this makes it reasonable to treat as an open question at least
initially whether the conditional that we know from propositional logic –
the material conditional – captures the meaning of the natural-language
“if . . . then . . .”-construction.20 A still weightier consideration is that the
evidence that the two are not the same is, by now, simply overwhelming –
as will be seen at various junctures in the book. It is too much to believe
that all or almost all of us are with great frequency mistaken about whether
some conditional is true, or whether it is acceptable, or how probable it is.
But that, as psychologists have shown, is precisely what must be concluded
if the ordinary-language conditional is taken to coincide with the material
conditional.
20 There are general reasons for being doubtful about at least the radical form of antipsychologism

that was famously propagated by Frege. If one wants one’s logic to also pertain to the arguments
encountered in everyday reasoning and cast in natural language, then surely one will want it to be
descriptively adequate in the sense that people do not regularly violate the introduction and elimination rules associated with the various logical constants; if people in their reasoning frequently
violate the introduction and/or elimination rules for (say) the conjunction operator, then that is
a strong indication that those rules fail to capture the meaning of the natural-language expression
“and.” Note, however, that if this is granted, there may be no way to maintain the old ideal of logic
as giving an account of purely form-based valid inference. For instance, experiments documented
in Elqayam [2006] appear to show that whether people evaluate conjunctions with indeterminate
conjuncts according to the weak Kleene table for the conjunction operator or according to the
strong Kleene table depends on the content of the conjuncts (and possibly on the source of the
indeterminacy).

