11

factors (the amount of water and fertiliser) that are extremely sensitive to a change in the
background conditions. Alternatively, imagine that we have a theory that describes the details
of the physiological mechanisms governing plant growth by referring to a series of biochemical
reactions. Such a theory would allow deriving an invariant generalisation like
(3) Y = a1X1 + a2X2 + … + anXn + U’
where Y is the plant’s height and the Xs denote a set of variables relative to the physiological
features of the plant, while U’ is a subset of U. (3) might be thought as “unpacking” U in a set
of known variables such that, being manipulable, explicitly spell out how they interfere in the
causal outcome (i.e., plant height). In making explicit those variables, (3) allows explaining,
for instance, how the composition of the soil, temperature, air or noise pollution, presence of
pests etc. can, in terms of types of biochemical reactions, make a difference to Y. Since it is
difficult to imagine a generalisation about plant height that takes into account all background
conditions (consider logically possible metaphysical scenarios such as drastic changes in the
physical structure of the universe – for instance, a change in the composition of matter or in
the structure of space), (3) still must include a variable for background U’. Nonetheless, (3) is
more stable than (2), because it is insensitive to many of those circumstances that disrupted
(2). Accordingly, an explanation invoking (3) is deeper that an explanation invoking (2)
because (3) “enable[s] inferences to more counterfactual situations” (Ylikoski and Kuorikoski
2010, p. 209) than (2).
Explanatory depth is not just related to the stability of the explanatory generalisations, but
also to the choice of the variables taken into account. In this respect, Hitchcock and Woodward
observe that “ideally, one would like to formulate generalisations that are not sensitive at all to
the ways in which the values of the variables figuring in them are produced” (2003, pp. 1867). Remember that, in the manipulationist framework, it is precisely the (logical) possibility of
interventions what allows establishing the counterfactual dependence between an effect and its
causes. Importantly, variables that can be manipulated independently from the specificity of
the scenario under study make the generalisation in which they appear portable to other
scenarios. (2), besides being shallow in the sense that it does not take into account potentially
disrupting background conditions, is also shallower than the explanation invoking (3) because
it relates Y to variables quite sensitive to the way in which they are manipulated. Amount of
water and fertiliser are certainly relevant to explain the height of many plants, but are not
relevant in all cases (think about, for instance, aquatic plants): the explanation invoking (2) is

