16

founding of new populations, splitting of populations, bottlenecks – are indeed often related to
a reduction of the size of the population. In all such cases, there is a difference between the
potential and actual reproducers that is captured by the distinction between census and effective
population size.9 For instance, gamete sampling is the process by which only a percentage of
the gametes produced is represented in the next generation because some individuals overreproduce and others do not at all. So, for example, given a census population size N, the idea
of gamete sampling is that only the genetic contribution of the effective population size Ne is
represented in the next generation. Thus, the passage from N to Ne clearly involves a reduction
in the size of the population. However, significantly, other potential cases might not involve
reduction of the size of the census population. Suppose for instance that in a small population
of 10 organisms with equal fitness (e.g., clones) reproducing by parthenogenesis, 9 have one
offspring but one has mono-ovum twins: in this case, all potential reproducers do as a matter
of fact reproduce, so all members of the census population do, but one of them reproduces
more. In this case, there is no reduction of the census population to the effective population as
the two coincide: in fact, there are 10 potential and 10 actual reproducers. In spite of this,
because all organisms have equal fitness, we are inclined to consider the evolutionary outcome
as an instance of drift. Still other cases might involve the expansion of the effective population
size. For instance, in vitro fertilization allows infertile organisms (i.e., members of the census
population who are not potential reproducers) to have offspring.
As a consequence of these considerations, even though population size reduction is
undoubtedly a good proxy to test drift hypotheses in many cases, it cannot, in our opinion, be
considered as the cause of drift outcomes. As a matter of fact, we think that population size
reduction is an effect, rather than a cause, of drift.10 In order to clarify this prima facie
unintuitive statement, let us introduce what we think are the causes of drift. They are, as a first
approximation, chance events (in our examples, for instance, the spontaneous division of the
ovum in two embryos and the availability of a certain technology). With this expression we do
not refer to indeterministic events (even though they might sometimes be), but rather to the

9

Effective population size can be conceptualized in a variety of ways. When it is estimated that human effective
population size is around 10.000 individuals (Yu et al. 2004) even though current census size is over 7 billions,
reference is to the genetic variability in sampled genes. The reason for this discrepancy – already highlighted by
Wright (Ohta 2012, p. 2) – is that a bottleneck in the history of the lineage drastically reduces effective population
size. Another, more general and less refined, conceptualisation of effective population size merely draws on the
difference between potential and actual reproducers. While both ways of conceptualising effective population size
are legitimate (indeed there are many more, see note 11), the vernacular conceptualisation is sufficient to ground
our argument.
10
This is not to say that the size of a population cannot play a causal role in evolutionary dynamics, but just that
it is not because of the causal role that population size plays that drift can be considered as a force.

