222
Becoming

through some of the appendix exercises with Lea Pao. Their fingerprints
appear variously here. Sarah in particular spent a day improving the first
section with me. These few names stand in, somewhat inadequately, for
the hundreds of students I’ve taught since my first class on composition
in 1995, with whom I learned how to teach writing at the most basic levels. And they figure, as well, my long history of learning writing, which
began as it does for all of us in grade school and continued through college
(Henry Schwarz, John Glavin, Bruce Smith), my brief period of intense
interest in creative writing (and the classes I took around that), my tiny
career in journalism (and the editors and teachers that helped me), and
into graduate school, where Herbert Blau, Gregory Jay, and Christopher
Lane left their marks on my habits and my prose.
At Columbia University Press, Philip Leventhal, the book’s editor, helped
see this book through to completion, helped pick the title, reframed some
its ideas, and helped me resist a few suggestions from friends and colleagues for specific changes. I’m also grateful to the press’s two anonymous reviewers, one of whom I am sad to disappoint by having retained
the word “amaroidal,” but with whom I share nonetheless, I suspect, a
predilection for the dark reaches of the dictionary. Kathryn Jorge’s copyediting has improved the prose and saved me from a number of sad mistakes; she and Irene Pavitt advised me on structure and kept the entire
publication process moving along smoothly.
I would never have been interested in academic writing had I not grown
up in a profession with so many fantastic and admirable writers. Many
of these belong to the generation of scholars and critics I read in graduate school, including Roland Barthes (in French, but also in the lovely
English translations by Richard Howard, Richard Miller, and Annette
Lavers), Jameson, the two Millers (D. A. and Nancy K.), Eve Sedgwick,
Leo Bersani, Rey Chow, Jonathan Culler, Stephen Greenblatt, and many
others. I tried in this book to cite some other folks, especially ones nearer
to my generation, to register academic writing’s eternally surprising, vernal beauty. Quoting my favorites was usually just a question of wandering
over to the office bookshelf, but I also found great writing by people I’d
never heard of by poking through recent journal issues.
The less direct conditions of this book’s possibility are both institutional and personal, and include my department at Penn State and my

