174
Ta C T i C s

order from creating, as Diderot put it, “burlesque contrasts; an article
on theology would find itself relegated to a position next to one on
mechanical arts” (DOC 217). Some commentators have read the alphabetical burlesque as the project’s most radical move, its way of scrambling the hierarchies, and particularly the disdain for manual work,
incarnate in knowledge trees such as Bacon’s and even d’Alembert’s.
Koepp again: “in the Encyclopédie ‘mendiant’ precedes ‘noblesse,’ and
‘chaircuitier’ comes before ‘clerc.’ One can read more about the production of iron ore than about coats of arms.” But the virtues of alphabetical order—its convenience as a mode of access, its liquidation
of hierarchy—precipitated out of a deeper, even more radical perception of necessity. Here I mean the encyclopedists’ conviction that
any tree of knowledge was perforce an arbitrary schema passed off as
an authoritative one, and that instead of colluding in such a ruse it
was better to embrace the more explicit arbitrariness of the alphabet.
Witness this moment in d’Alembert’s “Discours préliminaire,” where
a modesty bordering on self-abnegation meets a Borgesian turn for
counterfactual inventory:
One could construct the tree of our knowledge by dividing it into
natural and revealed knowledge, or useful and pleasing knowledge, or speculative and practical knowledge, or evident, certain,
probable, and sensitive knowledge, or knowledge of things and
knowledge of signs, and so on into infinity. . . . We are too aware
of the arbitrariness which will always prevail in such a division
to believe that our system is the only one or the best. It will be
sufficient for us if our work is not entirely disapproved of by men
of intelligence. . . . [O]ne should not attribute more advantages to
our encyclopedic tree than we claim to give it. . . . It is a kind of
enumeration of the knowledge that can be acquired—a frivolous
enumeration for whoever would wish to let it go at that alone, but
useful for whoever desires to go further.
On the heels of a long rationale for the tree of knowledge, d’Alembert backs
away, dubbing it arbitrary, provisional, useful only to the extent that it
provokes its own supersession. Such passages reveal that the Encyclopédie

