7.1. Structure Identifiability

7.1.2

137

Additive Noise Models

Proposition 7.1 shows that a given distribution could have been entailed from several SCMs with different graphs. For many of these graph structures, however, the
functions f j appearing in the structural assignments are rather complicated. It turns
out that we obtain non-trivial identifiability results if we do not allow for arbitrarily complex functions, that is, if we restrict the function class. As we have already
seen in Chapter 4, we will assume in the following Sections 7.1.4 and 7.1.5 that the
noise acts in an additive way.
Definition 7.3 (ANMs) We call an SCM C an ANM if the structural assignments
are of the form
X j := f j (PA j ) + N j ,
j = 1, . . . , d,
(7.1)
that is, if the noise is additive. For simplicity, we further assume that the functions
f j are differentiable and the noise variables N j have a strictly positive density.2
Some of the following identifiability results assume causal minimality (Definition 6.33). For ANMs, this means that each function f j is not constant in any of its
arguments. Intuitively, the function should really “depend” on its arguments. The
proof of the following proposition is provided in Appendix C.10.
Proposition 7.4 (Causal minimality and ANMs) Consider a distribution induced by a model (7.1) and assume that the functions f j are not constant in any
of its arguments, that is, for all j and i ∈ PA j there is some value pa j,−i of the
variables PA j \ {i} and some xi 6= xi0 such that
f j (pa j,−i , xi ) 6= f j (pa j,−i , xi0 ).
Then the joint distribution satisfies causal minimality with respect to the corresponding graph. Conversely, if there are nodes j and i such that for all pa j,−i the
function f j (pa j,−i , ·) is constant, causal minimality is violated.
We have argued in Remark 6.6 that we can restrict ourselves to functions that are
not constant in one of their arguments; see Proposition 6.49. We have now seen that
for ANMs with fully supported noise, this restriction implies causal minimality.
Given the restricted class of SCMs described in (7.1), do we obtain full structure
identifiability? Again, the answer is negative. Theorem 4.2 and Problem 7.13
2 These two conditions guarantee that the joint distribution over X , . . . , X allows for a strictly
1
d

positive density, for example.

