generalisations and have the characteristic of being exploitable for explanation
or for causal assessment. In this paper, I focus on questions related to causal
assessment rather than explanation. That is to say, I will be concerned with
what makes empirical generalisations causal rather than with what makes them
explanatory.
In §2, I present the manipulationist account of empirical generalisations. I
make it clear that manipulation is central for the account. The rest of the paper
investigates the status of manipulation for questions of causal assessment.
In §3 I argue that the manipulationist account is trapped in a dilemma. If the
project is read as contributing to the conceptual analysis of causality, then it is at
an impasse concerning the methods for causal assessment, i.e. no story about how
to establish whether X causes Y is offered. If the project is read as contributing
to the methodology of causality, then a second dilemma opens up. Strictly
interpreted, manipulationism fails to offer methods for causal assessment in
scientific areas where manipulations are not performed. Charitably interpreted,
instead, manipulationim becomes so vague as to be an unilluminating—and even
misleading—rationale underpinning causal reasoning in both experimental and
nonexperimental contexts.
In the light of the previous discussion, in §4 I reassess empirical generalisations. The core of agreement with manipulationist theorists is that empirical
generalisations are indeed change-relating relations and that for empirical generalisations to be causal they indeed have to be invariant, albeit in a sense that
does not take manipulations as methodologically fundamental. The importance
of the change-relating character of empirical generalisation has to do with the
rationale underpinning causal reasoning: it is not manipulation but variation
that does this job.

2

Manipulationist Empirical Generalisations

To understand the manipulationist project, we need to spell out the notions of
(i) empirical generalisation, (ii) invariance, (iii) intervention, and the relations
they stand with respect to each other.
An empirical generalisation is a relation between variables that has the characteristic of being change-relating or variation-relating: changes in the putative
causal-variable X are associated with changes in the putative effect-variable Y .
Of course, the problem of distinguishing causal from spurious or accidental generalisations immediately arises. We could hit upon a change-relating relation
that is accidental: an increased number of storks might be statistically associated with an increased number of births, but arguably there is no causal link
between these two variables. Or, a change-relating relation might be spurious:
yellow fingers might be statistically associated with lung cancer but this is the
case because they are effects of a common cause, that is cigarette smoking.
Change-relating relations have to show a certain invariability or stability
in order to be causal (or to be explanatory—this falls outside the scope of
the paper). Briefly put, this means that empirical generalisations have to be
invariant under intervention or under a sufficiently large class of changes.
There are two different types of changes we might be interested in. The
first sort of changes involves background conditions, whereas the second sort
of changes is exactly those that establish invariance. The former, also called

2

