Jennifer Lackey

15

positive existing norms and break down negative social norms, it need not violate
the respect of the gossipee, and it can be quite enjoyable. Regarding the epistemic status of gossip, Coady considers two objections: ﬁrst, since gossip is inspired,
not by a consideration of the truth but by malice, it is epistemically defective and,
second, it excludes the gossipee’s falsiﬁcation or correction of the report in question, which is an important epistemic source. He responds that gossip need not
be malicious—one may gossip about a person’s upcoming promotion simply out
of interest in the topic—and, even if it is not inspired by the purest or loftiest
of intentions, it need not be disconnected from a concern for the truth. To the
second objection, Coady argues that there is often little reason to suppose that
the gossipee will be a reliable source for conﬁrming or disconﬁrming the report in
question. Hence, Coady argues that gossip is not in fact a pathology of testimony
at all but, rather, it is a perfectly normal form of testimony whose moral status is
less problematic than is typically thought and whose epistemic status is actually
quite epistemically reasonable.
Coady then turns to rumor and urban myth. Though similar to gossip in some
respects, rumor differs in that it has no strong justiﬁcatory base, its subject matter is not necessarily personal, and it is not restricted in its circulation. Though
rumor may have some epistemic merits, such as prompting the creation of hypotheses for further exploration, Coady argues that it is nonetheless a pathology of
testimony. For unlike cases of normal testimony, many cases of rumor involve
neither an original source of the information being conveyed nor a speaker who
has competence with respect to this information. More precisely, Coady argues
that rumor is what J. L. Austin calls a ‘misﬁre’ rather than an ‘abuse’ of the
speech act of testifying. Whereas misﬁres simply involve speech acts that have
gone wrong in a way that nulliﬁes them, abuses constitute genuine but irregular
performances of these acts. In this way, the lack of credentials on the part of the
person who spreads rumor renders her assertion void as testimony, thereby resulting in rumor being a pathological form of testimony. Urban myths, however,
differ from rumors in that they have much higher levels of complexity, are presented in the form of fully ﬂedged stories, have an abiding nature, and are invariably
false and ill-founded, though commonly believed to be true. Coady then argues
that whether urban myths are pathologies of testimony depends on the degree to
which they are presented as testimony or as ﬁction.
Coady concludes by pointing out two general lessons that should be drawn
from his discussion. First, whether a certain communication is a pathology of
testimony cannot simply be read off from the form or content of its telling and,
second, pathologies of testimony need not be either morally or epistemically
worthless.
In ‘Getting Told and Being Believed’, Richard Moran focuses on the reciprocal relations of a speaker’s telling his audience something and his audience’s believing him, where ‘telling’ is distinct from but includes asserting, and believing
the person is distinct from but includes believing the proposition asserted. He

