(i) is just a statement of the view applied to our running example. ‘suitably strong’ means here
whatever it needs to rule out the epistemic adequacy (in this context at least) of arguments
from ignorance. Suitable strength is compatible with the body of necessities being empty, so
long as we know it to be empty. The literature takes it that plausible candidates to belong to
the suitably strong body will include, at some level of generality, the principles of essentiality
of origin and of essentiality of kind. But regardless of which and how many elements are in
there, the requirement about suitable strength dictates that we should know them all and know
them to be all. As Fischer puts it, absence of evidence (about the existence of a necessity) is
not enough; we need evidence of absence. (See Fischer 2016: 78.)
(ii)

Given (i), on necessity-first accounts, our rational degree of confidence that my
office desk can break cannot be higher than our degree of confidence about the basic
(de re) necessities relevantly involved, and about the non-existence of further
necessities.

Thus, in the running example, our (alleged) basic knowledge that unbreakability is not
essential to (and thus not necessary of) the desk, that the desk is essentially made of wood,
and that the desk is essentially a desk, epistemically grounds our piece of knowledge that the
table can break (on the basis of this possibility being determined not to be ruled out by any of
the table’s essential properties). But not only this: given that that is the priority order, our
rational degree of confidence in the latter is upper bound by our degree of confidence in the
former pieces of knowledge. And yet, I contend:
(iii)

Our confidence that my office desk can break is higher than our confidence about
my desk’s essential properties. And this difference in degrees of confidence is (at
least as per our current epistemic situation) the rational one.

Hale (2013) distinguishes different levels of probative force of arguments for modal claims.
As we have seen in §3.1, he believes that the meaning-based arguments that can be given to
establish essential truths about, for instance, (the property of) being square are more
conclusive than the abductive cases that can be offered in favour of, precisely, “general
principles of essence”. (See in particular Hale 2013: §11.3).
I cannot agree more with Hale on this. And I want to add to it: the inductive arguments that
can be given in favour of the desk’s breakability are stronger—in terms of probative force—
than the abductive arguments supporting essentialist claims. This, I contend, supports the
rationality of the different degrees of confidence exhibited. Looking at things with the lens of
a social epistemologist, this difference in probative force is, likely, what explains the
asymmetric distribution of peer-agreements and peer-disagreements: claims of ordinary
possibility are significantly more widely peer-agreed than essentialist claims. It is
incompatible with what is pictured by this radiography that our ordinary possibility
knowledge is grounded in (basic) necessity/essentially knowledge of the sort required by a
necessity-first account.
5. Final remarks and further reading.
It is important to note that the two distinctions in sections 3 and 4 cut across each other. As
such, results centred on one of them will not per se inform research centred on the other.
There’s nothing inherent to, for instance, a necessity-first approach that requires uniformity in

11

