302 / Acceptable Generalizations
denote random quantities, i.e., functions from objects to real numbers or vectors. If we are going to have a general theory of scientific inference, we must
therefore either have a way of generating an ideal language (not very likely) or a
way of choosing between alternative languages in the case in which we have
alternatives to choose between (rather more realistic).

4. UNIVERSAL GENERALIZATIONS
So far we have in our rational corpus of practical certainties some statistical
hypotheses, e.g., that between 0.49 and 0.51 of coin tosses result in heads; that
the distribution of readings of the weight of this object is normal with a mean
between V— 2.6d and V + 2.6d (i.e, the weight of the object lies between these
limits); that the mature weight of species X of frogs is normally distributed with
a mean between mi and ra2 and a standard deviation between d1 and J 2 Now let us consider how these statements are used. According to my notion
of probability, such statements are ingredients in probability assertions. If we
know that between 40% and 60% of A's are B's—that is, if the corresponding
statement is a member of our set of practical certainties—and if x is a random
member of A with respect to B, relative to what we know, then the probability
that x will be a B is the interval (0.4, 0.6). Suppose, as is not unreasonable, that
what we know is that between 0.99 and 1.0 of the ^4's are B's, and that we know
this at a level of practical certainty of 0.99. Then if x is a random member of
A with respect to B, the probability that it will be a B is (0.99, 1.0). This is
perfectly adequate grounds simply to accept that x is B in any lower level
rational corpus.
Now suppose that for any term x in the whole language, if "x G A" is added
to our rational corpus, then either: (1) x is a random member of A with respect
to B, relative to that possibly enlarged rational corpus, or (2) it is known already
in that rational corpus that x is a member of B. If this is so, then for any term x,
if "x is a member of A" is in our rational corpus, "x is a member of B" will be
in the rational corpus of any lower level. This is tantamount to either: (1) accepting in the rational corpus of practical certainties, the generalization, "All
^4's are B's," or (2) adopting as a material rule of inference (a Sellarsian P-rule)
for getting from statements in the set of practical certainties to statements in
any body of beliefs of lower level: From "x is A," infer "x is B."
It looks as though we are well on our way to a classical reconstruction of
scientific inference: we have shown how, in effect at least, a universal generalization can come to be accepted on the basis of enumerative evidence. I used to be
more or less persuaded of this, but now I have my doubts. I shall express those
doubts in a strong form: the situation described in the preceding paragraphs
never happens.
We might say it never happens because all synthetic universal generalizations
are false; but this would be a misleading way of putting the matter. A more

