Values of Truth and Truth of Values

237

non-standard theory of mind. An initially more plausible approach might be
to reject the premise, appealed to just above, that the expressivist needs to read
(TN) as
Socratic: It is correct to believe <p> in virtue of <p> being true.
How else to read (TN)? Well, one possibility is to read it as
Euthyphronic: <p> is true in virtue of it being correct to believe <p>.
Another would be to take it that truth and alethic correctness are simply identical.
Earlier we noted that this is implausible if we take correctness to attach to the
act of believing and truth to the proposition believed. But we might try avoiding
this by construing ‘correct to believe <p>’ as equivalent to ‘<p> is correct to
believe.’ If so, then we might claim:
Identical: <p> is true = <p> is correct to believe.
Both of these interpretations have their problems; but for present purposes, we
need only note that neither will do for the expressivist. If either Euthyphronic
or Identical is endorsed together with expressivism about alethic correctness, the
latter position collapses. Here’s why. Let us grant, for the moment, that the
expressivist is entitled to deﬂationism after all. And thus let us grant that she
is entitled to her distinction between the alethically engaged and disengaged
perspectives. Thus, on her view, from the alethically disengaged perspective
<p> is correct to believe
does not state a fact—or a fact, even if from the engaged perspective, we are
entitled to say that it is true, and thus expresses a fact in the deﬂationary sense.
But now consider: if either Euthyphronic or Identical are true, then it is difﬁcult
to see how
<p> is true
could fail to be non-factual as well. Take Euthyphronic, which says that the
truth of a proposition is determined by its being correct. If it is non-factual
whether x, and x determines y, then it can’t be a factual matter whether y. Thus
if being correct is not a factual matter, and correctness determines truth, then
being true is not a factual matter either. Even more obviously, if correctness is
just identical to truth, as Identical contends, then if correctness is non-factual,
so is truth. Things get worse from here. For given the T-schema, where
<p> is true
fails to be factual, so must p. Which is to say that nothing at all is a
fact. And that seems bad, not only because it is absurd—but because it once
again deconstructs the distinction between facts and facts that the expressivist
requires.

