48

Jason Baehr

in the relevant intuitive or commonsense way, we think of it as necessarily
or categorically more valuable? There may be some initial support for thinking of
the guiding intuition in this way, for we do not tend to qualify our acceptance of
the claim that knowledge is more valuable than true belief by saying or explicitly
thinking that this claim holds only sometimes or only in relation to certain kinds
or instances of knowledge. This, however, is not sufﬁcient for showing that the
content of the guiding intuition is general in the relevant sense. At a minimum, it
leaves open the possibility that this content has certain implicit limits. Speciﬁcally,
it leaves open the possibility that we regard knowledge (at least implicitly) as
more valuable than true belief on the basis of certain features that we do not
(intuitively or otherwise) think of as necessary features of knowledge. I might,
for example, regard knowledge as more valuable than true belief at the relevant
intuitive level on account of its being accompanied by good evidence or a kind of
‘reﬂective epistemic perspective,’ while denying that such a perspective, strictly
speaking, is required for knowledge. In this case, my intuition to the effect that
‘knowledge is more valuable than true belief’ would at bottom be an intuition
to the effect that a certain kind of knowledge (e.g. ‘reﬂective knowledge’) or
knowledge that involves certain properties (properties which I do not regard
as essential to knowledge) is more valuable than true belief. Again, nothing
about the apparent character of the guiding intuition seems to rule out this
possibility.
In fact, I take it that there is something prima facie implausible about the
suggestion that when we think of knowledge as more valuable than true belief
in the relevant intuitive way, we think of it as necessarily or categorically
more valuable. We do not, in other words, tend to treat the relevant claim
as an exceptionless or necessary truth: as applying to any possible instance of
knowledge. Instead, the judgment in question seems to be something like a
broad generalization, the content of which may very well be indeterminate with
respect to whether in every case knowledge is more valuable than true belief. This
suggests that the alternative, exceptionless characterization is too strong, that it
attributes more than is warranted to the content of the guiding intuition. Thus,
while the guiding intuition may be somewhat general, it does not appear to be
completely or relevantly general.
This conclusion is reinforced by the idea that there is nothing independently
or inherently counterintuitive in the suggestion that there might exist, say,
at least one item of knowledge the value of which fails to exceed that of
the corresponding item of true belief. I take it, that is, that nothing in our
commonsense or pretheoretical way of thinking about knowledge rules out such
a possibility. But again, if the guiding intuition is a product of common sense,
and if its content is completely general, this suggestion should generate a clash
of intuitions; it should strike us as questionable or implausible that any item of

