232

Testimony and Epistemic Autonomy

condition incorporating these two factors, which is normatively both necessary
and sufﬁcient for deferential acceptance is:
TDAP 2: One properly accepts that P on the basis of trust in another’s
testimony that P—her word that P—just if she speaks sincerely, and she is
epistemically well enough placed with respect to P so that were she to have,
or make a judgement to form, a conscious belief regarding whether P, her
belief would almost certainly be knowledge; and she is better epistemically
placed with respect to P than oneself; and one recognizes all these things to
be so; and one is not aware of signiﬁcant contrary testimony regarding P.
TDAP 2 speciﬁes when it is proper to accept another’s testimony that P outright. There will also be situations where neither party is in a position to make a
knowledgeable judgement as to whether P, but one is better epistemically placed
than the other. In these cases it will be epistemically rational for the worse-placed
person to defer to the other’s opinion, while falling short of taking her utterance
as an expression of knowledge; hence forming only a tentative belief regarding
P. This is required when, for instance, an informed decision about how to act
is urgently needed. There may be some topics for which this situation is the
rule—that is, where knowledge as opposed to more or less well-grounded speculation is very hard to come by.¹⁵ It remains true that one should not accept
outright another’s testimony that P, unless one reasonably believes her to be so
placed as to (almost certainly) form knowledgeable belief regarding P. Hence
TDAP2 is the correct general principle governing the outright acceptance of
another’s testimony.
An explanatory comment is needed on the role of the complementary ‘internal’ and ‘external’ components of epistemic propriety in TDAP1 and 2. I have
formulated TDAP1 and 2 incorporating both internal and external components,
because I am concerned to describe what happens when things go right, and thus
how knowledge is spread by means of testimony. Externally, things are going
right when the testiﬁer speaks from her expertise-generated knowledge, and is
sincere. But epistemic rationality has a key internal component: it is not rational
to accept unquestioningly the testimony of an expert who, so far as one knows,
is no such thing. And, though not all-in epistemically proper, it is subjectively
rational and epistemically blame-free to accept another’s testimony, when one
falsely but justiﬁedly believes her to be an expert about the topic, being deceived
about this through no fault of one’s own. I am against purely exernalist accounts
of when acceptance of testimony is epistemically proper. These fail to incorporate
the requirement that the subject maintain epistemic responsibility for her own
beliefs. In Section 3 I spell out the implications, and means of satisfying, this
requirement.¹⁶
We may distinguish between a weak and a strong form of deference to another’s testimony:

