Epistemic Trespassing
Fordham University
n.ballantyne@gmail.com

Epistemic trespassers judge matters outside their field of expertise. Trespassing is
ubiquitous in this age of interdisciplinary research and recognizing this will require
us to be more intellectually modest.

1. Introduction
Epistemic trespassers are thinkers who have competence or expertise
to make good judgments in one field, but move to another field where
they lack competence—and pass judgment nevertheless. We should
doubt that trespassers are reliable judges in fields where they are
outsiders.
A few examples will guide our discussion. Linus Pauling, the brilliant chemist and energetic proponent of peace, won two Nobel
Prizes—one for his work in chemistry, and another for his activism
against atomic weapons. Later, Pauling asserted that mega-doses of
vitamin C could effectively treat diseases such as cancer and cure
ailments like the common cold. Pauling was roundly dismissed as a
crackpot by the medical establishment after researchers ran studies
and concluded that high-dose vitamin C therapies did not have the
touted health effects. Pauling accused the establishment of fraud and
careless science. This trespasser did not want to be moved aside by the
real experts.
Scientists sometimes encroach on one another’s fields. But philosophers are especially wary of intruders on their turf. The evolutionary
biologist Richard Dawkins has written and lectured on religion.
Experts in the philosophy of religion—atheists, agnostics, and theists
alike—charge that Dawkins fails to engage with the genuine issues and
sets up strawmen as his dialectical opponents. Dawkins appears to
overstep his competence as a biologist. Neil deGrasse Tyson, an astrophysicist, supplies a similar example in his remarks on philosophy.
Tyson has said, for instance, that philosophy is ‘useless’ and majoring

Mind, Vol. 128 . 510 . April 2019
ß Ballantyne 2018
doi:10.1093/mind/fzx042 Advance Access publication 12 February 2018

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article-abstract/128/510/367/4850765 by guest on 10 July 2019

Nathan Ballantyne

