Synthese

(2023) 202:192

Page 11 of 20

192

If some epistemologist adopts an externalist approach to the normative stage of the
project, they needn’t know what grounds modal truth. So, HMF isn’t true given an
externalist interpretation of the normative stage.
4.2 Normative internalism
Does HMF look more plausible given an internalist interpretation of the normative
stage? We show that there is no quick argument to HMF from internalist assumptions.
Access internalists have it that S’s belief in p is justified only if (a) there is a reason
R that stands in a epistemic support relation to p and (b) S has access to R and (c) S
has access to the fact that R is a reason (cf., BonJour, 1980). So, in order to show that
S has internalist justification for some modal belief, the epistemologist of modality
just needs to show that the subject has adequate reasons in the sense that conditions
(a), (b), and (c) are met. We will argue that the epistemologist does not need to know
what grounds modal truths in order to show that a subject has adequate reasons.
HMF suggests that epistemologists of modality have to know what grounds modal
truths in a metaphysical sense of ‘grounds’. But internalism just suggests that modal
epistemologists have to know what grounds modal truths in an epistemological sense
of ‘grounds’. These two requirements often come apart.
Of course, these requirements sometimes do coincide. There are some reasons
that are also metaphysical grounds of the contents of the relevant beliefs (hereafter,
‘metaphysical grounds’ abbreviates this longer phrase). The fact that Socrates exists is
an epistemic reason that supports that {Socrates} exists. Regardless of this, to motivate
a general move from internalist assumptions to HMF, metaphysics-firsters require the
stronger claim that reasons are always metaphysical grounds. If there are some reasons
that aren’t metaphysical grounds, then epistemologists of modality can highlight those
reasons without knowledge of what grounds what.13
There are lots of reasons that aren’t metaphysical grounds. For example, that you
have seen that x is F is reason to believe that x is F. This is because (a) that you have
seen that x is F makes that x is F probable, (b) you have access to the fact that you
have seen that x is F, and (c) you have access to the fact that: that you have seen that
x is F is a reason to believe that x is F.14 However, the fact that you’ve seen that x is
F is not a metaphysical ground of the fact that x is F, given most values of ‘x’ and ‘F’.
For instance, that you’ve seen that Dave is awake doesn’t ground the fact that Dave
is awake. It is more often the opposite. That is, the content of your belief (i.e., that x is
F) is a partial ground of the content of your reason (i.e., that you’ve seen that x is F)
13 Metaphysics-firsters might complain that epistemologists of modality ought to be able to elucidate
every reason that can support some modal belief. Since some of those reasons are metaphysical grounds,
epistemologists need to know what grounds what. However, it isn’t plausible to require that epistemologists
elucidate every reason that can support some modal belief. That is an insurmountable task. It is more
plausible that epistemologists of modality ought to elucidate those reasons that in fact support the relevant
subjects’ modal beliefs. But this just brings us to the question of whether the relevant subjects in fact
support their modal beliefs with metaphysical grounds. If there is a plausible route from propositional to
doxastic justification in an internalist framework, then it is just an empirical question which (doxastic)
reasons are justifiers. We have significant doubts that the empirical wheel of fortune spins in favour of
metaphysics-firsters. But we leave it open for metaphysics-firsters to show otherwise.
14 We assume these standard internalist claims for purposes of argument.

123

