372

Nathan Ballantyne

3. How commonplace is trespassing?

Mind, Vol. 128 . 510 . April 2019

ß Ballantyne 2018

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article-abstract/128/510/367/4850765 by guest on 10 July 2019

I began with cases where Pauling, Dawkins, Tyson, and McGinn apparently stepped over an epistemological line. Trespassing happens.
But does it happen often? Pauling and company are easy-to-recognize,
public examples of trespassing. But subtle, harder-to-detect sorts of
trespassing could be commonplace, and sometimes more dangerous
because they are unobvious.
To recognize more subtle forms of trespassing, we need to find
interdisciplinary connections forged between different fields. We
need to see how these connections cause experts unwittingly to overstep their limits. This easily happens when experts investigate what I
will call hybridized questions—ones addressed and answered by
combining evidence and techniques from two or more fields.
Fields are fixed by a set of questions and expertise is fixed by bodies
of evidence and skills needed to answer a field’s questions. But note
that sometimes fields overlap or converge and come to share a question. This may happen in one of three ways: (a) the evidence required
to answer a question reliably or responsibly comes from two or more
fields; (b) the skills required to evaluate the evidence well come from
two or more fields; or (c) both the relevant evidence and the relevant
skills required to answer a question reliably or responsibly come from
two or more fields. In such situations, the experts in one field will not
all satisfy the same evidence or skill conditions as the experts in another field. Since the experts are in different fields, the evidence and
skills that constitute their expertise differ. A hybridized question, then,
is one that experts in distinct fields could try to answer using their
own resources. Take the question, ‘What caused the CretaceousPaleogene extinction event?’ It is addressed by experts in palaeontology, geology, climatology, and oceanography, among other fields.
The question is thoroughly hybridized and answering it calls for a host
of evidence and skills. A question can be hybridized even if it is experts
from one field only who address the question. But once investigators
recognize that a question is hybridized, they should think that answering it reliably and responsibly calls for cross-field resources.
These days, hybridized questions abound. I will consider one case in
detail before noting others more briefly. From the 1950s through to the
1980s, philosophers approached questions about human freedom
using the tools of analysis and counterexample. Principles meant to
articulate the nature of freedom were tested using ‘thought experiments’. Questions about free will were treated as metaphysical or

