The Epistemic Consequences of Paradox

61

of wisdom, the other responses are signiﬁcantly wiser than the Inconsistency
response.

15 The Conﬁdent Response
This philosopher accepts the soundness of the proof of the disjunction and
thinks she has found the true disjunct. Consistency is attained.
But recall that the epistemic situation we are examining is not that of
a philosopher responding to just the Sorites paradox, or the Liar paradox, or
the Problem of the Many, or Tibbles–Tib, and so on. No, I have in mind a more
restricted situation: someone (like you and myself) who satisﬁes assumptions
A1–A5. You and I have the task of responding to a bunch of CDs. You probably
aren’t aware of the details of each one (unless you have done a lot of work
inspired by this Element); no such devotion is necessary to get the epistemic
problem loaded. For instance, I have worked out in detail only several of them,
but I have sketched a couple of others and – the key point – I know that there are
more disjunctions awaiting me. I estimate that you and I are faced with dozens
of disjuncts from a bunch of CDs, each disjunct philosophically counterintuitive, and yet we know that some of those disjuncts are true. It is not an intelligent
response to the problem posed by the doxastically distressing disjunctions to
focus on just the Liar, for instance, and offer one’s favorite solution to just it.
I mean, the well-informed philosopher has a signiﬁcantly larger task.
I suspect the following situation will be common. After one has seen the
philosophically counterintuitive disjuncts, call them the Ds, in one particular
CD, one looks at D4, say, and thinks to oneself something that can be captured
with the following inner speech:
Well sure, D4 is initially counterintuitive – like each of the Ds is. There are
good reasons to think D4 is false; no doubt about it. But the reasons to think
it’s false are deﬁnitely weaker than the reasons to think the other Ds are false.
When you add up all the evidence, D4 is deﬁnitely more plausible than any of
the other Ds. Although D4 is indeed implausible, it is less implausible than the
others, if you will. So we should conclude that it’s the true one.

How often is this response wise for the philosopher who is familiar with many
paradoxes (satisfying our ﬁve assumptions)?
On the one hand, we philosophers make doxastic moves similar to that one all
the time when faced with a plainly valid argument for a conclusion that we
disbelieve – and the move is often quite reasonable, or so we can plausibly allow
for the sake of argument. For comparison, suppose we think C is false but later
accept that {PA, PB, PC} ⊧ C. Suppose further that we see that, while PC is at least
somewhat plausible, it is not plausible enough for the argument to succeed
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009052948 Published online by Cambridge University Press

