INTRODUCTION TO THE SERIES

CHRISTINA HENDRICKS

This book is part of the Introduction to Philosophy open textbook series, a set of nine (and counting?)
open access textbooks that are designed to be used for introductory-level, survey courses in
philosophy at the post-secondary level.
OVERVIEW OF THE SERIES
This set of books is meant to provide an introduction to some of the major topic areas often covered
in introductory-level philosophy courses. I have found in teaching students new to philosophy that
many struggle with the new ideas, questions, and approaches they find in introductory courses in
philosophy, and that it can be helpful to provide them with texts that explain these in relatively
straightforward terms.
When I began this project there were few textbooks that I was happy enough with to ask students to
purchase, and even fewer openly licensed textbooks that I could pick and choose chapters from, or
revise, to suit my courses. This series was created out of a desire to provide such resources that can be
customized to fit different contexts and updated by instructors when needed (rather than waiting for
an updated version from a publisher).
Each book is designed to be accessible to students who have little to no background in philosophy, by
either eliminating jargon or providing a glossary for specialized philosophical terms. Many chapters
in the books provide examples that apply philosophical questions or concepts to concrete objects or
experiences that, we hope, many students are familiar with. Questions for reflection and discussion
accompany chapters in most of the books, to support students in understanding what to focus on as
they are reading.
The chapters in the books provide a broad overview of some of the main discussions and debates in
the philosophical literature within a topic area, from the perspective of the chapter authors. Some
of the chapters focus on historical approaches and debates, such as ancient theories of aesthetics,
substance dualism in Descartes, or classical utilitarian versus Kantian approaches in ethics. Others
introduce students to questions and topics in the philosophical literature from just the last few
decades.
EPISTEMOLOGY xi

