273
. Note to Page 56

the study of limi.nal phenomena which you do not deny. When one talks
about cultures one usually has in mind a whole system of procedures which
somehow hang together and sustain each other. Given the framework of the
system, every single strategy appears necessary. But the whole is a specific
development and articulation of strategies.
THEORETICAL PHYSICIST: I would like to jump in on this and support my
fell0w physicist, albeit from the point of view of a theorist. The calibration
example does strike me as illuminating. What came to my mind when I heard
you talk about the need of these experiments to understand their detector are
scales. Suppose I want to know my weight. To know my weight I need an
instrument-some way to measure what I am after, plus the exact knowledge
how this instrument reacts. What, if I put five pounds on it, it will indicate,
its errors and efficiency, and the systematic e~ror I make by using this
instrument rather than another. What more is an experiment in HEP? Is it
not just the testing of scales for measuring something that comes from
theory? The weight, the thing we are really interested in, are the theoretical
predictions. Experiments are, in the last analysis, preparing and calibrating
the equipment.
KK (to TP): Frankly, I am not surprised by your comment. It corresponds
to an understanding I have come across over and over again by theorists-the understanding that the intellectually important ingredient is physics theory, while the experiment is just what we imagine happens on the
scales (or thermometer) level, writ larger. What interests me about this
understanding is how it .renders HEP experiments invisible despite their size
and complexity, and despite authors, such as Galison, Traweek, and Sutton
(and perhaps even Pickering from the the<?ry ~ide), who bring them to our
attention.
READER: You forget, if you allow me to come back just briefly from the
notes in Chapter 2, you forget the role our disciplines, philosophy and
history (but also sociology), have played in promoting this understanding,
by paying attention almost exclusively to physics theory. You also forget
that physics is a segmented universe in which fundamental theorists and
experimentalists live, work and think detached from each other, without
knowing much about each other. Theoretical physicists often simply do not
know what goes on in experiments. You also forget that studies such as the
above are only appearing in the last ten years.
PWA (second theoretical physicist): The question by the theorist should be
answered, nonetheless. Perhaps I may point out what I, as another theorist
(however, a theorist working at Bell Labs!), wrote more than twenty years
ago in an article in Science (Anderson 1972: 393), namely that the main
fallacy in the above kind of thinking is that the reductionist hypothesis on
which it is based does not by any means imply a "constructionist" one.

