[SEN]

Equality of What?

normal level of utility, which you and I get from a sandwich and
beer. Since advantage is judged not in terms of utilities at all, but
through the index of primary goods, expensive tastes cease to provide a ground for getting more income. Rawls justifies this in
terms of a person’s responsibility for his own ends.
But what about the cripple with utility disadvantage, whom
we discussed earlier? Leximin will give him more income in a
pure distribution problem. Utilitarianism, I had complained, will
give him less. The Difference Principle will give him neither
more nor less on grounds of his being a cripple. His utility disadvantage will be irrelevant to the Difference Principle. This may
seem hard, and I think it is. Rawls justifies this by pointing out
that “hard cases” can “distract our moral perception by leading
us to think of people distant from us whose fate arouses pity and
anxiety.” 28 This can be so, but hard cases do exist, and to take
disabilities, or special health needs, or physical or mental defects,
as morally irrelevant, or to leave them out for fear of making a
mistake, may guarantee that the opposite mistake will be made.
And the problem does not end with hard cases. The primary
goods approach seems to take little note of the diversity of human
beings. In the context of assessing utilitarian equality, it was
argued that if people were fundamentally similar in terms of
utility functions, then the utilitarian concern with maximizing the
sum-total of utilities would push us simultaneously also in the
direction of equality of utility levels. Thus utilitarianism could
be rendered vastly more attractive if people really were similar.
A corresponding remark can be made about the Rawlsian Difference Principle. If people were basically very similar, then an
index of primary goods might be quite a good way of judging
advantage. But, in fact, people seem to have very different needs
varying with health, longevity, climatic conditions, location, work
28 John

Rawls, ‘A Kantian Concept of Equality’, Cambridge Review (February

1975), p. 96.

