214

The Tanner Lectures on Human Values

goods.” 26 These are “things that every rational man is presumed
to want,” including “rights, liberties and opportunities, income
and wealth, and the social bases of self-respect.” Basic liberties
are separated out as having priority over other primary goods,
and thus priority is given to the principle of liberty which demands
that “each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive
basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty for others.” The
second principle supplements this, demanding efficiency and
equality, judging advantage in terms of an index of primary
goods. Inequalities are condemned unless they work out to everyone’s advantage. This incorporates the “Diff erence Principle” in
which priority is given to furthering the interests of the worst-off.
And that leads to maximin, or to leximin, defined not on individual utilities but on the index of primary goods. But given the
priority of the liberty principle, no trade-offs are permitted
between basic liberties and economic and social gain.
Herbert Hart has persuasively disputed Rawls’s arguments for
the priority of liberty,27 but with that question I shall not be concerned in this lecture. What is crucial for the problem under discussion is the concentration on bundles of primary social goods.
Some of the difficulties with welfarism that I tried to discuss will
not apply to the pursuit of Rawlsian equality. Objective criteria
of well-being can be directly accommodated within the index of
primary goods. So can be Mill’s denial of the parity between
pleasures from different sources, since the sources can be discriminated on the basis of the nature of the goods. Furthermore,
while the Difference Principle is egalitarian in a way similar to
leximin, it avoids the much-criticised feature of leximin of giving
more income to people who are hard to please and who have to be
deluged in champagne and buried in caviar to bring them to a
26 Rawls (1971), pp. 60-65.
27 H. L. A. Hart, ‘Rawls on Liberty and Its Priority’, University of Chicago Law
Review 40 (1973); reprinted in N. Daniels, ed., Reading Rawls (Oxford: Blackwell,
1975).

