ESCAPING

FROM

MODEL

LAND

A 1-in-17.6-million-year event is still somewhat more plausible
than the ‘twenty-five standard deviation moves, several days in a
row’ that were noted by David Viniar of Goldman Sachs after the
financial crisis of 2008. This remark is often quoted with a bit of a
snigger because almost any useful model would be falsified by these
observations. When something happens that is vanishingly unlikely,
usually you do not say, ‘My goodness! How terribly unlucky we
were.’ Instead, you have to say, ‘Ah! My model was wrong.’
Unfortunately, things are rarely quite so clear-cut. If you observe
an event that is not vanishingly unlikely but just somewhat unlikely,
how do you know what to do? Was the unprecedented British
Columbia heatwave of 2021 a 1-in-a-1,000-year event, or was it
instead a sign that the weather and climate models used to understand the range of plausible events were inadequate? Probably a bit
of both. Say you are an insurer, and you’ve paid an expert consultant

for a flood loss model that gives you a threshold for a 1-in-200-year
event. You write insurance contracts according to that assumption,
and the following year a large flood severely affects southern
Germany, where you have a lot of business. What you do next is
going to depend on the trust that you have in that model. If you have

a strong prior belief that the model is correct, you write off the loss
as a ‘rare event’ and continue to insure according to those assumptions. If you only have a weak trust in the model, you fire the consultant and get your information from someone else next year (and
maybe stay away from flooding hazards).
Try the same thing a different way: I flip a coin and ask you to tell
me the probability of it being heads or tails: 50-50, right? It’s heads.
Now I flip it again. What’s the probability this time? Of course, it is
still 50-50 — the previous outcomes don’t in any way influence the
next ones and we are confident that the probability of any individual
coin flip is always 50-50 regardless of what it was last time. But if I
keep doing this and keep getting heads, how many will it take before
you are convinced that the coin is biased? There isn’t a single ‘right’
answer to that question, because it depends on what you think of me
and whether you’ve examined the coin. If you trust me and the coin
came from your own pocket, then probably quite a lot. If Iprovided
203

