THE

ATMOSPHERE

IS

COMPLICATED

and the human components (individual drivers, operators making
decisions, the controllers who set the overall goals of the system),
but notes that they are all essential to the functioning of the system.
So if we think of climate science as a cognitive assemblage aimed
at socially processing information, of what does it consist and how
well is it functioning? It is engaged in sensing the physical climate
and Earth system with a huge array of measuring devices, processing
that information both in human brains and in weather and climate
models, co-ordinating and synthesising research programmes,
generating research outputs, and interfacing with national and
international governance. It also generates a high-profile report by
the IPCC every few years, summarising the best of our knowledge
about climate and feeding it into public debate as well as into
policy-making.
As with any complex system, there is a lot of feedback between
different components. Research outputs influence climate policies.
Social and political factors influence research funding. Extreme
weather and climatic events influence political priorities. Climate
policies influence greenhouse gas emissions. And so on. Although,
on a purely scientific basis, the aim might be to generate as accurate
a description as possible of past, present and future climate, the
actions taken in pursuit of that aim are guided by different conceptions of accuracy, different ideas about which aspects of climate are
most relevant and different presentations of research findings to
support certain kinds of decisions. In a 2020 article, environmental
geographers Duncan McLaren and Nils Markusson examine in
detail the interrelations between the evolving capabilities of climate
models, the technical and policy options on the table, and the political emphasis on different kinds of governance, showing how these
have co-evolved to reckon with new information, perspectives and
political shifts. They highlight in particular the ways that promised
solutions in the past have failed to live up to their advertised potential and so ‘layers of past unredeemed technological promises have

become sedimented in climate pathway models’. As they say, this
constant reframing and redefinition of climate targets tends to defer
and delay climate action — even when the intentions of those involved
157

