The moral law

A divine command theorist must therefore maintain the theory’s principal
idea if he is to hold on to the thesis that morality springs from God’s will. Yet

maintaining this idea means holding that God’s will precedes every standard
of right and wrong. It means, that is, holding that no standard of right and
wrong exists independently of God’s will or serves to guide the judgments he
makes in issuing commands. And because God is all-powerful, there are no

limits on what he can command. These propositions constitute the doctrine
of theological voluntarism to which divine command
clear-eyed formulation,
God commanded,

theory, in its most

reduces. It follows then that no matter what act

it would be right to do that act and wrong not to do it.

For no command of God could fail to be authoritative for human beings, and
therefore no command of God could fail to be a universal standard of right
action. Such is the import of theological voluntarism. Consequently, however
horrific or bizarre the act, if God commanded it, then it would be right to do it
and wrong not to do it. If God commanded,

say, that blue-eyed infants be

tortured to death, then it would be right to torture blue-eyed infants to death
and wrong not to. But this result throws the theory into a real muddle. No
one, after all, would allow that someone would be acting rightly in torturing

infants to death, yet of course Christian belief in God requires taking God’s
commands as standards of right and wrong. The only way out of the muddle,
therefore, is to give up theological voluntarism. It is to give up the thesis that

the standards of right and wrong originate in God’s will.

3. Rational intuitionism
Giving up theological voluntarism does not, to be sure, mean that Christian

thought must give up its conception of God as the supreme ruler of the
universe. What

it means

is that, to retain this conception, a Christian

thinker must suppose that God imposes laws in accordance with standards
of right and wrong that exist independently of his will. That is, a Christian
thinker must suppose that such standards are evident to intelligent beings
and therefore to God, whose intelligence is infinitely greater than human
intelligence, and that God’s rule over human beings accords with his knowledge and understanding of these standards. At the same, it is understood

that their validity is independent of his will and that his actions can be
judged by them. What is more, because God cannot err in determining his

will, the standards necessarily inform it and therefore the commands that

