Egoism

disparity in opinions, one might suspect that the doctrine was understood
differently by the different parties to the dispute. So we would do well to
examine this possibility, considering first how it might be understood as
plausible and whether, on such an understanding, the primary argument
for egoism would still be cogent. Certainly, the doctrine would be plausible
if all it meant were that a person’s intentional actions always sprang from

motives supplied by his own interests. After all, it would be hard to see how
a person could be moved

to pursue something if he had absolutely no

interest in it and did not believe that failure to pursue it would lead to the
loss of something he did have an interest in. But if the doctrine came to no
more than that a person’s own interests were the sole source of the motives

of his or her intentional actions, then the primary argument would not be
cogent. Specifically, its basic premiss would be too weak to support the

proposition a defender of egoism must establish for the argument to meet
the main burden of proof on arguments for egoism. The reason is that a
person typically has interests in many things and people besides himself:

his family, his friends, his neighborhood, his country, the associations and
communities

to which he belongs, his relationship to God, and so forth.

These interests focus his thoughts and feelings on people and things other
than himself, and accordingly the motives that they supply are motives to

act for the sake of those people and things and not for his own sake.
Take, for example,

the interest a person typically has in his family.

Typically, a person regards his family’s welfare as something that is important to him absolutely and not just in relation to his own happiness. So his

interest in his family supplies a motive to promote their welfare for their
sake alone. It follows, therefore, that their welfare, and not his own happiness, is the end this motive provides. Consequently, the ultimate end of the
intentional

actions that spring from this motive

need not be his own

happiness. It may be his family’s welfare only and, indeed, will be if the
actions spring from no other motive. And similar points follow about the
motives that many of the other interests a person has in people and things
besides himself supply. Plainly, then, if the doctrine of psychological egoism came to no more than that a person’s interests were the sole source of
the motives of all of his or her intentional actions, one could not infer from

it that the ultimate end of every intentional action was the actor’s own
happiness. Yet without this inference the primary argument for egoism

breaks down. Without it one cannot go on to infer that the ultimate end

35

