260

refer to the population level. McLoone confuses the requirement of variation for establishing causation with the necessary condition of variation for natural selection to occur in
a population. Insisting that variation on a property, rather
than the property itself, is what causes a phenomenon is
simply not in line with the notion of causation defined within
the interventionist account and beyond, and consequently
cannot be used as an argument against the individual-level
cause view. And in fact, if one were to follow McLoone’s
argument, they would have to conclude, for instance, that
performing a linear regression analysis and establishing that
a plant’s leaf area causally influences its growth, as part of
a randomized experiment, is not locating causation at the
level of the individual plant because one will need to refer
to variation in leaf area—a population-level property—to
establish causation. McLoone’s argument, a slippery slope,
thus demonstrates that the presence of variation cannot be
considered as a way to adjudicate the debate between the
individual- and population-level cause views.
It seems furthermore that McLoone did not see the relevance of an important distinction made within the interventionist account, namely between an actual and a potential
difference maker after Waters (2007).16 This distinction is
precisely designed to demarcate cases in which one could
intervene on a property to show that it is causally involved
in an outcome, yet the value the variable would take after
the intervention is performed is never actually exhibited in
the population of events considered, from cases in which
this value is exhibited in this population and the cause is
observed. In the former cases the cause is a potential difference maker, while in the latter cases, it is an actual difference
maker.
More precisely, for X to be an actual difference maker
with respect to Y, at least two conditions should be verified,
according to Waters. First, X should be a cause of Y, that is,
following the interventionist account there should be at least
one possible intervention on X that leads to a difference in Y.
Second, X should be defined over an actual population which
exhibits a range of variation, and there should be at least
some interventions on X using values from this range that
make a difference in Y. By contrast, for X to be a potential
difference maker only the first of the two conditions needs
to be satisfied.17 This implies that all actual difference makers are also potential difference makers, while the converse
is not true.

16
I believe that the distinction made by Glennan (2009), to defend
the individual-level cause view, between productive and relevant
cause is on a similar track.
17
Recently, Griffiths et al. (2015) have implemented this distinction
using a causal variant of mutual information.

13

P. Bourrat

As a way of illustrating the distinction, Waters uses the
example of two genes causing eye color in Drosophila. One
gene exhibits no variation in the population, but a possible
ideal intervention would produce a difference in eye color.
This gene is a potential difference maker. The second gene
exhibits some variation in the population, and this leads individuals to have different eye colors in this population. This
gene is an actual difference maker in the population under
investigation. We see here again that the presence of a varying population, whether potential or actual—which might
be defined over a single object varying temporally or a collection of objects— is necessary for establishing causation.
Following McLoone’s argument, any actual difference
maker in a population of objects ought to be considered as
a population-level cause, effectively rendering the notion
of “individual-level cause” vacuous and going against the
classical interpretation that actual difference makers have
causal powers at the level they are defined.

The Individual‑Level Causalist Position
Interpreted Correctly
In the previous sections, I showed that McLoone missed the
mark in characterizing the individual-level cause view. I suspect that this mischaracterization might have originated from
a misunderstanding of the role of a regression coefficient
within the interventionist account which itself might have
been fueled by one problematic move made by Otsuka in his
defense of the individual-level cause view. To be completely
fair, this problematic move is identified by McLoone in his
footnote 4, but quickly dismissed.
Before presenting Otsuka’s move and showing why it is
problematic, I must briefly provide a simplified version of
the model used by Otsuka. Following standard evolutionary theory (see, for instance, Lande and Arnold 1983), the
reproductive output of a given individual i in a population18
can be characterized as follows:
(2)
where wi and zi are the absolute reproductive output and
the character of this individual respectively, 𝛽 is the linear
regression coefficient of w on z, and 𝜖i is the residual (typically conceived of as an environmental deviation).
Given this model, Eq. (2) can be inserted in the Price
equation, presented informally above, which is a very
abstract way to describe evolutionary change between two
generations, or more generally between two times (Price

wi = 𝛽zi + 𝜖i ,

18

Note that strictly speaking this is not the fitness of this individual
since it is the outcomes of all factors influencing reproductive output,
including those that have nothing to do with natural selection.

