262

for any z which is in line with Weismann’s doctrine that
acquired characters are not transmitted to the next generation. Contrary to Otsuka, I believe that it is only valid for
some interventions, namely those that do not produce heritable changes. But z might be considered, for instance, as
the number of alleles of a given type an individual has in
the germline, as is often done in some versions of the Price
equation. In such a case an intervention on this character
would lead to a change in the composition of the population at the next generation and consequently to evolutionary
change.22
Taking all these remarks together, how should we interpret the individual-level cause view? I propose that one way
to do so is the following. Because only the variables of a
model can be intervened upon, and the individual characters
(z) of the individuals are the independent variables of this
model, they are the causes in this model. Yet, since each
individual of the population does not have the same effect
on the change in the population at the next generation, the
mean influence is reported. It corresponds to 𝛽Var(z).23 But
in principle one could take each individual and see how it
contributes to the mean change in the population. In fact,
an ideal intervention on the value of z within the range of
observed values (since we are referring here to actual difference makers) in the population would make a difference in
the average value of the character at the next generation. As
a matter of fact, the effect of a single individual on the population dynamics is what evolutionary biologists sometimes
aim at uncovering (see, for instance, Coulson et al. 2006).24
To see this, we can define the squared deviation from the
mean character z of an individual i as y so that yi = (zi − z)2.
y is here an individual-level variable even if it is defined
in reference to a population-level variable; any standardized variable is. Assuming n is the number of individuals in
the population, from this definition and the definition of the
∑
variance for a variable X as Var(X) = 1n ni=1 (Xi − X)2 we
can rewrite Eq. (6) as:
22

Note also that heritability might be considered as positive for
intragenerational changes in line with the point made in Bourrat
(2015b).
23
Note that leaving aside 𝛽 which is supposed constant and thus only
modulates uniformly what each individual contributes, this is almost
literally what a variance is. In fact, in words, the variance of a variable is the expected squared difference between an individual value
and the mean value in the population (for a formal definition see the
main text). This difference is squared in order to obtain the magnitude of this difference, since some deviations will be positive, others
negative, and on average will cancel out each other. But rather than
the squared difference one might decide to take the standard deviation, which is the square root of the variance, to talk about the average effect of an intervention. Standard deviation is often considered a
better measure of variation since it has the same unit as the variable
to which it refers.
24
I thank Peter Takacs for this point.

13

P. Bourrat

𝛥z =

n
n
𝛽 ∑
1 1∑
𝛽
(zi − z)2 =
y.
w n i=1
wn i=1 i

(7)

One can see clearly in Eq. (7) that changing the value of an
individual’s y by an ideal intervention—for instance decreasing it—would lead to a change in 𝛥z , assuming that the intervention on y produces a heritable change. If this assumption
is respected, then following the interventionist account of
causation, y—an individual-level variable associated with
natural selection—causes some evolutionary change. This
leads to an individual-level causal interpretation of natural
selection as the average change made by heritable fitness
affecting individual characters on evolutionary change.25

When is Natural Selection a Population‑Level
Cause of Change?
In the previous section, I have established that in one of the
simplest possible settings, insofar as one can intervene on
the character of an individual and produce a change in the
character of the population at the next generation, then the
individual-level cause view holds since the change produced
would be associated with natural selection. Does this mean
that the notion of population-level causation in reference to
natural selection should always be rejected? I do not think
so. Although in any situation an ideal intervention on individual-level properties would, in the model discussed, lead
to evolutionary change, two types of situations that matter
empirically should be distinguished. Recall that 𝛽 belongs to
the structure of the causal model and will not be altered by
an ideal intervention allowed by the model. Yet a physical
intervention or manipulation that is a change in the value of
a variable an agent might carry (or nature itself) might or
might not alter 𝛽 . Note crucially that this means that ideal
interventions can do things that would be impossible in the
real world.26 With the distinction between an ideal and a
25

Note that if y is not perfectly heritable one will have to compute its
heritability h2, which, like 𝛽 , is a parameter of the model. Following
our hypotheses, we assumed here that reproduction is perfect, so that
(h2 = 1).
26
This is why the notion of ideal intervention is often associated with that of a miracle. For instance, Woodward (2003, p. 135)
considers an ideal intervention to be synonymous with a “localized
miracle,” borrowing the notion of miracle from David Lewis. Pearl
(2009) talks about “surgical procedure.” He is very clear that ideal
interventions can do things that might not be possible physically
when he writes “[s]ymbolically, one can surely change one equation
without altering others and proceed to define quantities that rest on
such ‘atomic’ changes. Whether the quantities defined in this manner correspond to changes that can be physically realized is a totally
different question that can only be addressed once we have a formal
description of the interventions available to us” (p. 365). For more on

