The ­Causes of a Major Transition

175

Box 9.1

A Darwinian Space
Peter Godfrey-­Smith (2009) described a multidimensional space where populations of any
kind can be placed to account for their capacity to evolve by natu­ral se­lection. Paradigm cases
of such “Darwinian populations” include familiar multicellular organisms like fish. ­These
score high on all of the axes of the Darwinian space. Other entities, like sponges or bacteria
films, score lower on at least one of the axes. Despite that all of t­hese are, in some sense,
collectives of individuals (fish, sponges, and biofilms are made up of individual cells), only
some have evolutionary potential as populations of collectives. Other collectives, such as a
school of fish, have virtually no capacity to undergo evolution by natu­ral se­lection—­the
relevant pro­cess is taking place at the level of the fish, not the school.
Godfrey-­Smith described five population features that support a high capacity for evolution by natu­ral se­lection:
V: Variation. Without variation, natu­ral se­lection has no raw material to work on. In addition
to current standing variation, the long-­term ability for adaptive evolution depends on an
ability to generate new functional variants.
H: Fidelity of Inheritance. Adaptive evolution depends on parent–­offspring similarity. Note
that in Darwinian space the fidelity concept is not the same as the technical definition of
heritability, but is a general mea­sure of reliability of phenotype resemblance of parent and
offspring.
S: Intrinsicness of Fitness. The extent to which fitness differences within a population depend
on the intrinsic characters of the individuals rather than external features, such as their location. That is, fitness should be a function of the fit between characters that belong to the
individual and its par­tic­ul­ar context, not context alone.
C: Continuity of the Fitness Landscape. Cumulative adaptive evolution is thwarted in a
rugged fitness landscape, where small changes in the heritable material lead to very large
changes in fitness.
α: Competition. Describes the extent to which reproductive success of one member of a
population affects success of ­others or the extent to which reproduction is a zero-­sum game.
Some life cycle features make collectives more likely to be members of a Darwinian population b­ecause they reduce the evolutionary potential of the individuals that make up
collectives:
B: Bottleneck refers to the extent to which a life cycle features a stage with a limited material
overlap and/or low ge­ne­tic diversity, such as the zygote stage of a multicellular organism.
This is impor­tant for ensuring high relatedness and low variation among group members.
G: Germline-­Soma Separation, or Reproductive Division of ­Labor, refers to the extent to
which group members vary in their chances of reproduction. This is impor­tant for which
(continued)

