60

The Theory of Evolution

Downloaded from http://mind.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Bath Library & Learning Centre on June 18, 2015

different from their mere Being, however secured and extended
in space or time, what is the content of this notion " well" or
" good V I have elsewhere tried to show that the only satisfactory answer to this qnestion is that of the old-fashioned Utilitarianism which Mr. Darwin and his disciples are trying to
transcend. The only rational ultimate ground, in my opinion,
for pronouncing any sentient being in a " good" condition, ia
that its condition is calculated to produce as great an amount as
is under the circumstances possible of Happiness, that is, pleasant or desirable feeling or consciousness: taking into consideration not its own happiness only—for we have no rational
ground for preferring this to any other happiness—but that of
all eentient beings, present or future, on whose manner of existence it exercises any influence. If this be so, it only remains to
wk how far the notion of Progress or Elevation in the scale of
life, as understood by Evolutionists, supplies us with clear guidance to the right means for attaining this ultimate end. Now,
no doubt, in comparing the happiness of man with that of tho
lower animalR, or the nappiness of civilised man with that of
savages, we commonly assume that amount of happiness varies
according to degree in scale of organisation. We do this
because what we really mean by "higher life" seems, when
we look closely at the notion, to be convertible with more life.
As Mr. Spencer says, " we regard as the highest life that
which shows great complexity in the correspondences, great
rapidity in the succession of them, and great length in the
series of them;" the two former characteristics supplying a
measure of the intensive quantity of life lived in a given time,
and the latter adding its extensive quantity. And the experience of mankind, as a whole—though there are not wanting individual dissentients—seems to support the belief that
Conscious or Sentient Life is, speaking broadly and on the
average, desirable; that some degree of pleasure is the normal
state of sentient beings as such and pain abnormal. Thus ib
follows that the " higher" such a being stands in the scale of
organisation, the happier it is, generally speaking. In accordance with this general principle we regard the exercise of more
varied and complicated activities, the extension of sympathy
with the pleasures and pains of others, the development of
scientific and historical interests, of aesthetic sensibilities, &c.
—which might all be brought under the general notion of
" progress in the correspondence between the organism and its
environment"—as involving generally an increase of happiness.
Still, in so far as we pursue any of these elements of culture for
their own sakes, our pursuit is closely guided and checked by
experience of the pleasure derived from them; and it would

