Incorporating the Environmentally Sensitive Phenotype into Evolutionary Thinking

91

convincing, as plasticity is “ancestral” (was pres­ent prior to colonization of novel host
plants) and was expressed as clearly adaptive phenotypes.
A number of studies offer evidence that plasticity can alter the array of phenotypes
available to se­lection, and hence have potentially altered the direction of evolution through
ge­ne­tic accommodation (point [ii] above). We elaborate two examples we find compelling
that are largely compatible with the hypothesis. The first involves phenotypic plasticity of
morphology in threespine stickleback—­research that also highlights aspects of evolution
via ge­ne­tic accommodation (Wund et al. 2008, 2012). Laboratory-­reared oceanic (“ancestral”) stickleback exhibit modest but appropriate patterns of plasticity (figure 5.1) when
raised in environments simulating ­those at the extremes of a benthic-­limnetic foraging axis
(Wund et al. 2008, 2012). This ancestral plasticity parallels the evolutionary transitions
made by benthic and limnetic freshwater ecotypes, transitions that have evolved repeatedly and in­de­pen­dently in derived freshwater populations. This pattern suggests that an
ancestral “flexible stem” (sensu West-­Eberhard 2003) might have influenced the direction of evolutionary change in the adaptive radiation in freshwater, promoting the environmental match. Further, the patterns of induced phenotypic plasticity in freshwater
populations (figure 5.1) differ from t­hose in oceanic populations ­under the alternative
laboratory rearing conditions, demonstrating ge­ne­tic accommodation (Wund et al. 2008;
Wund 2012). Collectively, t­hese studies suggest both that the direction of evolutionary
change could have been mediated by plasticity and that ge­ne­tic accommodation has
occurred.
A particularly intriguing example of the way in which plasticity could have influenced
subsequent evolution involves the major evolutionary transition in vertebrates from aquatic
to terrestrial locomotion. Polypterus senegalus, an extant analogue of the fish likely to
have given rise to tetrapods, exhibit dif­fer­ent limb development when raised in an aquatic
environment versus a moist terrestrial environment. In a terrestrial environment, ­these fish
use their fins differently than in the aquatic environment, and they develop limb anatomical
characteristics that are similar to t­hose observed in stem tetrapod lineages during the
Devonian Period (Standen, Du, and Larsson 2014). Thus, plasticity could well have influenced the ultimate shape and function of tetrapod limbs by altering the range of phenotypes,
and under­lying patterns of gene expression exposed to se­lection in the novel, terrestrial
environment.

Using Population Genomics to Address the Plasticity Hypothesis
­There is substantial evidence that adaptive phenotypic plasticity readily evolves (Schlichting and Pigliucci 1998; Pigliucci 2001; DeWitt and Scheiner 2004) and is often a component of adaptive divergence (Torres-­Dowdall et al. 2012; Dayan et al. 2015; Kenkel and Matz
2016). Additionally, a ­great wealth of studies demonstrate how environmental variation

