62

The Theory of Evolution

5*

Downloaded from http://mind.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Bath Library & Learning Centre on June 18, 2015

our present hypothesis, less happy. This result has often been
noticed by observers of the minute sub-division of labour which
is a feature of our industrial progress : but the same sort of
prima facie conflict between individual and social development
occurs in considering most of the great problems of modern
politics; such as the relations between rich and poor generally,
the relations between governors and governed, and the relations of the sexes. Now, aa it is the individual, after all, who
feels pleasure and pain, it is clear that his development (or
happiness) must not be sacrificed to attain a higher form
of social organisation ; the latter end can only be sought
within the limits fixed by the former; the point then is
to determine what these are. It may be thought, perhaps,
that the history of past stages in the evolution of society
will indicate the reconciliation or compromise between individual and social development to which the human race
has gradually been working up. It would seem, however,
that history rather shows us the problem than its solution.
For, while a continually greater specialisation of functions is
undoubtedly an ever-present feature of social development, we
have to notice as proceeding side by side with this a continually
fuller recognition of the rights and chums of the individual as
such. And this, giving a point of view from which the
elements of the community are regarded as equal and similar,
considerably qualifies, and, to some extent, counterbalances the
tendency to " heterogeneity" above noticed ; it is obvious,
eg., that an ancient society with a fully developed castesystem, where the existence of the individual was absorbed in
and identified with his social function, was, in some respects,
more heterogeneous than our own, in spite of the greater
differentiation of functions in the hitter. Hence we have on
the one hand an ever increasing social inequality, and, on the
other hand, an ever profounder protest against this inequality;
and, whatever the right compromise between these conflicting
tendencies may be, it does not seem possible to determine it by
any deduction from the doctrine of Evolution.
Forwhenwe turn to examine the principles of social construction propounded by eminent sociologists, we see very plainly
that any attempt to determine the political ideal by a scientifio
formula of Social Evolution must at least fail in obtaining that
" consensus of experts," which is, to common men, the most
satisfactory guarantee of scientific method. Those thinkers
who are most confident of having discovered the law of progress seem hopelessly disagreed as to the next term in the
series. For example, Comte teaches us that the " influence
dispersive du principe de la specialisation," tending in it&

