III. THE IDEAL OF DEMONSTRATION

75

III. THE IDEAL OF DEMONSTRATION: d1tocpaiv&tV

The sense of the term d1tocpaivrov is of special importance, for some commentators have denied that Theodorus gave proper proofs of his assertions, while others maintaining the opposite view do not justify their
claim adequately. A. Szabo, S. Heller, J. H. Anderhub, F. Hultsch and
Eva Sachs have all insisted that the term can only mean 'showing heuristically'. But others, T. Heath, H. Vogt, H. Zeuthen, and B. L. van der
Waerden have rightly criticized this contention, supporting instead the
view that Theodorus demonstrated his theorems properly. 51
Those who refuse to credit Theodorus for proper demonstrations have
employed weak arguments. Anderhub, for instance, argues that d1tocpaiV&tV cannot mean 'to prove, to demonstrate formally', because it was
not so listed in the lexica he consulted. 52 But we must recognize that the
classical lexica, when they cite instances of various usages of a term,
frequently rely upon passages whose meaning is debated. Thus, we may
use these reference works as indispensable aids, but not as final authority.53 Szabo maintains that Plato makes no mention of formal proof, as
the technical term S&ucwvat is lacking; he incorrectly cites Vogt as a
concurring authority. 54 Heller, following Eva Sachs, at least presents an
illustration to bolster his case. In a passage from the Method Archimedes
seems to contrast d1t6cpacne; with d1t6S&t;te; in order to stress that
Eudoxus first proved what Democritus had earlier asserted without proof:
At61t&p Kal 'tfbv s.&ropruul'trov
't06'tO)v, rov EiSSo;oe; e;T\6pT\K&V
1tpfb'toe; 'tTJV d1t6S&t~tv, 1tspi 'toO
KOOVOU Kat die; 1tupaJ1tBoe;,
... 00 J1tKpav d1tovslJ1at liv 'tte;
AT\J10Kpi'tcp J1spiSa 1tp6>t:cp 'tTJv
d1t6cpacnv 'tTJV 1tspi 'toO
slPT\J1EVOU O'XtlJ1a'toe; xrople;
d1toB&i~sroe; d1t0cpT\VaJ1Evcp.

So also in the case of those
theorems, of which Eudoxus
first discovered the proof, i.e., on
the cone and the pyramid ... one
should perhaps allot no small
share to Democritus, who
was the first to assert, though
without proof, the assertion
about the said figure. 55

But there are dangers in using this example to uphold the claim that
d1tOSstMvat and d1tocpaivs1V regularly carry contrasting senses. For, if
this were the case, why would Archimedes have included the phrase

