534

Max Dresow and Alan C. Love

4. Analytical Implications of Ongoing Characterization
and Interdisciplinary Entanglement
The CE provides a rich case study for exploring philosophical issues related to characterization and explanation. This section explores some of these issues in relation
to the themes of entanglement and interdisciplinarity (section 4.1), and then defends
two substantive claims (section 4.2).

4.1. Features of interdisciplinary entanglement
As noted at the outset, the characterization of complex phenomena exhibits three distinctive features. First, it is often done for its own sake and not solely for the purpose
of facilitating explanation or prediction. Second, it tackles multiple dimensions of a
phenomenon simultaneously (including explananda and potential explanantia), often
requiring the coordination of multiple disciplinary inputs. And third, it involves an interaction with the construction of explanatory models throughout the career of a research project (the entanglement thesis). We now consider explicitly how the strands
of research described in section 3 illustrate these features, particularly the entanglement
thesis and its corollary of interdisciplinarity. In addition, we draw out the implications
of our analysis for philosophical reconstructions of scientiﬁc practice by defending
two claims: (1) characterizations of complex phenomena are frequently contested
along several dimensions of descriptive understanding, and (2) the dynamics of ongoing characterization for complex phenomena are poorly described by models that
treat recharacterization primarily as a response to explanatory failures (section 4.2).
Philosophers have tended to regard characterization as a kind of preparatory work
that serves as a means to the end of the main (explanatory) business of science (section 2). We emphatically dispute this. For complex phenomena like the CE, characterization is ongoing, open-ended, and takes place alongside the construction of
explanatory models. Attempts to explain complex phenomena must therefore track
a moving target, and since moving targets are more difﬁcult to hit, this feature of
characterization imposes a range of challenges on would-be explainers.
The CE has moved a great deal since it began to garner serious attention during
the 1970s. Prior to the cladistic revolution, it was thought to represent the initial divergence of major animal groups, and the challenge was to account for the apparently
rapid origin of nearly the whole of the ‘modern’ marine fauna. Yet, with the advent
of cladistic and molecular clock methods, this picture began to shift. To an increasing
number of researchers, the CE seemed to be an explosion of fossils only—the delayed
expression in the fossil record of a long and cryptic history of body plan evolution.
The challenge was thus to explain how animal groups that diverged in the Precambrian only entered the fossil record in a giant pulse in the Cambrian or slightly before.
More recently, reﬁned clock methods have brought estimates of divergence times

