18

NO ^
US

4. The Nomothetic Conception Revisited
With a clearer understanding of the key concepts of invariance and intervention,
we may contrast our account with Hempel's D-N model in greater detail, with
particular emphasis on how invariant generalizations differ from laws of nature.
Laws have traditionally been understood as universal generalizations of
the form `All A's are B's'. It is our contention that such generalizations,
even when they satisfy the conditions for lawhood standardly imposed
by philosophers, often fail to be explanatory, or are at best very poor
explainers. Discussions of the D-N model of explanation have often employed
toy examples of explanations having the logical form:
(5)

All A's are B's
Object o is an A
Therefore, o is a B

These have always had an air of artificiality about them. Real scientific
explanations are much more complex affairs with considerable additional
structure. Philosophers of science have generally recognized this but have
nonetheless assumed, no doubt under the influence of the D-N model, that (5)
is an acceptable idealizationÐthat it captures all the essential features of
genuine explanations.
Note that (5) does not have the appropriate form to be an explanation on our
account, since we require that the explanans and explanandum be expressed in
terms of the values of variables. This is easily remedied, however. Let X be the
characteristic function or indicator function for A, so that for any object o,
X(o) ˆ 1 if and only if o is A, and X(o) ˆ 0 if and only if o is not A. Analogously,
let Y be the characteristic function for B. Then (5) can be re-written:
(50 )

For all objects, X  Y
For object o, X(o) ˆ 1
Therefore, Y(o) ˆ 1

So the mere fact that (5) does not explicitly specify relationships between
variables is no objection to its qualifying as an explanation.
The problem, rather, is that the generalizations figuring in (5) and (5') do
not tell us what being a B (or having a certain value of Y ) depends on. It
may be that all objects are B's, or at any rate that all objects belonging to a
much broader class are B's. Consider, for example, the generalization:
(6)

All igneous rocks have mass greater than zero.

While this fits nicely with the traditional conception of a law, it does nothing
to tell us why some particular rock is massive: its having a non-zero mass in no

