OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 03/31/2018, SPi

Steven French and Juha Saatsi

199

consider the modal information provided by the physics. From the perspective of the
counterfactual-dependence account, this explanatory priority is underwritten by the
fact that in a typical application of these results to a particular system (e.g., the solar
system) there is a natural sense in which the conserved quantities depend on the features of the system represented by the Lagrangian and its symmetries, but not the other
way around. The Lagrangian and its properties reflect the relevant properties of the
system being described: kinetic and potential energy functions, and whatever constraints there are to its dynamics. When we consider changes to these features of the
system, we consider changing, for example, the spatial distribution of mass or charge,
or their quantity. These changes can have an effect on regularities manifested by the
system as it evolves over time: different features of the system may become constants of
motion, properties whose values are unchanged over time. The point is that there is no
way to alter these regularities concerning the system’s behaviour—these constants of
motion—directly as it were, without acting upon the features of the system that determine the system’s behaviour. And it is the latter that feature in the Lagrangian, the
symmetries of which thereby determine the constants of motion in a way that supports
explanatory what-if-things-had-been-different counterfactuals.
This asymmetry is best illustrated with a concrete example. For an elementary case,
consider a particle moving under a central force. In spherical coordinates ( r, θ , ϕ ) , the
potential energy U ( r ) of the particle depends only on the radial coordinate r, when a
spherically symmetric source of e.g., gravitational or electric force field is located at the
origin. The kinetic energy function
1
1
K = mv 2 = m r2 + r 2θ2 + rϕ 2 sin2 θ
2
2

(

)

feeds into the Lagrangian L = K − U (r ) . From Euler-Lagrange equations we get as
(separate) constants of motion the azimuthal and polar components of the orbital
angular momentum: pθ = mr 2θ and pϕ = mr 2ϕ sin2 θ . This is why the particle’s trajectory is constrained to a plane; this regularity about the dynamics depends on the
symmetry of the Lagrangian (namely, symmetry of kinetic and potential energy
functions).
Changing the potential energy function, either in its strength (by varying the amount
of mass or charge at the centre), or in its spatial geometry by breaking the spherical
symmetry in favour of some other symmetry, will have effects on the dynamical
behaviour of bodies moving under the potential. These effects are reflected also in
the regularities of the dynamics captured by the constants of motion. Grasping the
connection between these constants of motion and the symmetries of the Lagrangian
enables us to answer what-if-things-had-been-different questions such as: What if
the source were not spherically symmetrical? What if the source were a spheroid,
as opposed to a sphere? What if the spheroid revolved about its minor axis? What if
it oscillated in a particular way? From the counterfactual-dependence perspective

