Explanatory Generalizations, Part I: A Counterfactual Account

19

way depends upon its petrologic classification. This notion of dependence is
captured by our notion of a testing intervention: it is only if a generalization
is invariant under testing interventions that it conveys information about
how one variable depends on another. By subjecting an igneous rock to
tremendous heat and pressure, it can be transformed into a metamorphic
rock. This is an intervention, but not a testing intervention for the generalization in question: metamorphic rocks are also massive. Nor are there any
other interventions that qualify as testing interventions under which this
generalization is invariantÐhence our sense that it tells us nothing about
what the massiveness of rocks depends on. Put another way, the generalization cannot be used to answer what-if-things-had-been-different questions
about hypothetical situations in which the rock would not have been massive.
Indeed, if anything, (6) suggests false answers to questions about what would
happen if a particular rock were transformed from igneous to metamorphic.
This failure is closely connected to the familiar problem of explanatory
irrelevance. The classic example comes from Salmon (1971):
(7)

All men who regularly consume birth control pills fail to become
pregnant.
John Jones regularly consumed birth control pills.
Therefore, John Jones failed to become pregnant.

The generalization in (7), while arguably a law, is not invariant under testing
interventions. In particular, intervening to prevent John Jones from taking
birth control pills would not affect his chances of conception. Thus, while
(7) satisfies the requirements for successful D-N explanation, it does not
identify conditions such that changes in those conditions resulting from
interventions would lead to changes in the explanandum. According to
our account, this is why it fails to be explanatory.13
Our account agrees with Hempel's that to be explanatory with respect
to an object o, a generalization relating X and Y must not merely say that
the actual values of X and Y possessed by object o stand in this relation.
And like Hempel, we agree that the additional content of explanatory
generalizations is (at least partially) counterfactual in nature. However,
our account disagrees with Hempel's (and with other standard treatments of
the role of laws in explanation) about what this additional content consists
in. According to the standard view, to count as a law, and hence as
explanatory, a generalization must describe a relationship that holds of
the actual values of X and Y possessed by objects other than o. Moreover,
the relationship must also hold for certain hypothetical values possess by
objects other than o. In particular, if a generalization like `All A's are B's' is
to be explanatory with respect to o, it must `support' counterfactuals of the
following form: if some object o* that is different from o and does not
possess property A were to be an A, then it would be a B. (In terms of our

