12

Philosophy of Biology

whether the guinea pig is alive or dead, but this is not the contrastive focus of
interest. We are interested in what explains one coat color versus other colors in a living guinea pig. When background conditions are required for life,
they are necessary conditions for phenotypes to manifest, which prevents them
from explaining, causing and controlling the presence of one phenotype versus
another. This is why many background conditions do not explain the outcome
of interest (even if they seem relevant to it) – they are not explanatory if they
do not “make a difference” to the contrastive focus in question.
The interventionist account does not require that causes are actually manipulable with current technology or according to ethical standards. Interventionism
just requires that we can consider hypothetical manipulations, which involve
what would happen if the intervention were to occur (Woodward 2016). This
is consistent with causal reasoning in scientiﬁc and everyday life contexts, in
which we accept causal claims even when we cannot perform interventions
on the relevant causal factor(s). Examples of legitimate causes that we cannot
intervene on include: historical or past causes (“yesterday the medicine cured
my headache”), causes that are not manipulable with current technology (“the
location of the moon causes the tides to ebb and ﬂow”), and causes that we
cannot manipulate for ethical reasons (“the patient’s genes have caused their
disease”). The interventionist account includes these as genuine causes because
they meet the hypothetical manipulation requirement – in all of these cases, we
can consider hypothetical manipulations of the cause, and our evidence and
theory supports the claim that this hypothetical manipulation would change
the effect of interest.10 If a purported causal claim cannot be associated with
a hypothetical manipulation – perhaps because the suggested changes to the
candidate cause are inconsistent with scientiﬁc theory or because the purported
causes and effects are not sufﬁciently deﬁned (as mentioned in subsection 1.2) –
then this gives good reason to be skeptical that a causal claim has been provided
(Woodward 2003, 2016).
Signiﬁcant amounts of philosophical work has focused on the question of
how to deﬁne causality. While interventionism provides one answer to this
question, there remains the further topic of how many deﬁnitions of causation
we need to capture causal relationships in the world. This relates to “causal pluralism,” which is associated with different views in the literature (Cartwright
2004; Hitchcock 2007; Godfrey-Smith 2013). Three forms of causal pluralism
10

There are various ways to get information about causation even when intervention experiments cannot be performed. Evidence about interventionist difference-making relationships
can be supported by quasi-experiments, instrumental variables, observational methods, natural experiments, and other methods and aspects of biological theory (Shadish et al. 2002;
Angrist and Pischke 2009).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 38.156.15.196, on 19 Jan 2025 at 20:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009300940

