Explanation in Biology

39

these accounts are focused on explanations of natural phenomena – they are
focused on the use of mathematics (or non-causal information) in natural
science explanations or explanations of the physical world. Expressed in a
different way, these accounts are not interested in mathematical explanations
in the ﬁeld of mathematics or in non-scientiﬁc domains (Baker 2005). Additionally, many of these philosophical accounts of non-causal, mathematical
explanation aim to capture explanatory reasoning found in scientiﬁc work. As
Lange notes, this is a view of scientiﬁc explanation that aims to “do justice to
scientiﬁc practice” (Lange 2018, 24). This requires identifying explanatory targets of scientiﬁc interest, such that these targets can be couched in explanatory
why-questions and then answered, as opposed to providing obscure mathematical answers to previously unknown and scientiﬁcally uninteresting questions
(Baker 2005).
A second important standard that these accounts of non-causal, mathematical explanation are held to is that they need to justify the explanatory role
of mathematics. It is well appreciated that mathematics is used to represent
phenomena in the world. However, while this representational capacity can
support the scientiﬁc aims of description, prediction, and classiﬁcation, these
are all distinct from explanation. This is why these cases are often referred to
as “distinctively mathematical” – they are not just explanations that “employ”
mathematics, but cases in which the mathematics has the special feature of
being explanatory (Lange 2018, 4). A convincing argument for the explanatory nature of mathematics must address this question of explanatory power and
demonstrate how the math is doing more than merely representing phenomena
in the world. Finally, most accounts of non-causal, mathematical explanation
do not claim to be entirely free of causal information. While these explanations
often have some causal information, it is argued that they require non-causal,
mathematical information to be explanatory. In these accounts, there is some
mathematical (or non-causal) kernel required for the complete explanation that
marks it as distinct from standard causal explanations.
The topic of non-causal, mathematical explanation has received growing
attention for different reasons. One reason stems from concerns that philosophical accounts of scientiﬁc explanation have overlooked non-causal, mathematical explanation and focused mainly (or exclusively) on causal explanation
(Lange 2018). Work in this area aims to correct this deﬁciency by clarifying
how non-causal, mathematical explanations should be understood and how
they work. A second reason for attention to this topic concerns debates about
the existence of mathematical objects and so-called “indispensability arguments” that argue in favor of this existence (Baker 2005; Lyon and Colyvan
2008; Lyon 2012). In these debates, Platonists argue that mathematical objects
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 38.156.15.196, on 19 Jan 2025 at 20:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009300940

