MODERN ART

to art, and thereby discards the perceptible as an artistic medium. In so far as
‘modern’ art is the art of the avant-garde, then, it seems to have set itself
upon a course that ends in its demise. ‘Modern’ art is the end of art (as
indeed Duchamp in some of his moods wanted it to be).
Yet if we deny modern art the status of art properly so called, and decry its
pre-eminence, there is this difﬁculty confronting us: how can the art establishment have gone so badly wrong in taking it seriously? The claim that
most modern art is not art at all may conﬁrm the opinion of the ordinary
person in the street, but it is a fact that major galleries display work of this
kind, eminent critics review it, often favourably, and large sums of money
are paid for it. Prestigious awards such as the Turner Prize regularly consider
it, and from time to time readymade and conceptual art has been preferred
to all other types of entry. Could it be the case that all these people are
mistaken? If they are, there is a comparable error to be found in other arts.
Eminent musicians and concert halls have programmed ‘performances’ of
Cage’s 4′33″ and Yvonne Rainer’s Room Service was premiered in New York.
What are we to make of these facts?
Earlier it was observed that, until the nineteenth century, the vitality of the
arts relied upon patronage. During the nineteenth century, creative artists of
every kind were successful because they were popular. In this respect, the
nineteenth century was probably highly exceptional, because by the second
half of the twentieth century, patronage had resumed its traditional role. For
the most part, this has been the patronage of the State, though the personal
fortunes of industrialists and businessmen have generated signiﬁcant private
patronage as well, especially in the USA. But a further, and arguably quite
new, element is the phenomenon of art as investment, most marked in the
visual arts, though there are some instances in other media also.
This investment takes two forms, which affect each other through their
impact on the price that art can command. First, there is the investment of
art galleries in their collections. The sums involved are often immense, partly
because among the major players are foundations with enormous resources
at their disposal, chief among them Guggenheim and Getty. But alongside
these private benefactions are galleries that can call upon national purchasing funds, and strike government-approved tax deals with potential donors.
Compared with State expenditures on armaments, public health or social
provision, spending on the arts is low, but it is still large enough to inﬂate art
prices enormously.
Speculative investment on the part of both individuals and institutions
adds to this price inﬂation. It is common for company pension funds to
buy Old Masters, for example, and to hold signiﬁcant numbers of artworks
as part of their portfolio of investments. Similarly, some individuals have
made substantial sums ‘investing’ in art. The purchase of artworks is not
properly speaking a form of investment because, unlike oil wells or software
companies, they are a wholly unproductive asset. Any return on the money
194

