ART AND BEAUTY

purpose, not a material thing from which we might fabricate some
other thing. On the contrary, it is something that only manifests and
displays itself when it is constituted by the viewer.
(Gadamer 1986: 126)
Consider the case of a painting. Leonardo produced the Mona Lisa, but
what exactly did he produce? The answer, at one level, is a physical object
made of wood, canvas and pigments of various sorts, a unique object without any function. But this is not the level at which it is a work of art, of
course. The work of art is not a physical object at all, but an image – of a
woman with a faint enigmatic smile. To appreciate this, however, we have to
see this image for ourselves. If, for some reason, we can only see the thing
that Leonardo produced as a physical object, he has failed to present us with
the outcome of his imagination. Whereas aesthetic judgement can simply
‘play’ on the beauty of natural objects, in order to play on beautiful representations, it must ﬁrst see them as representations. This is why aesthetic
judgement and artistic production go hand in hand. The artist’s creativity
needs its audience for its very existence.
In this way Gadamer forges a plausible connection between art and the
aesthetic. We might still ask what special value attaches to art above natural
beauty. Gadamer’s answer is that the deliberate creations of the artist provide ‘the experiences that best fulﬁll the ideal of “free” and “disinterested”
delight’ (Gadamer 1986: 20). What is the mark of ‘best’ here? We must look,
he thinks, at ‘the anthropological basis of our experience of art’, the way
that art connects with our fundamental nature.
This connection, it turns out, is to be found in play. It is a fact about our
anthropology that, in common with some other animals, we engage in play.
By nature children engage in those activities essential to physical survival –
crying for food, falling asleep, reaching for the things they want. But they
also play. In thinking about play, we usually contrast it with work and for
this reason generally accept that play can be characterized as activity without purpose. But, as Gadamer points out, it is a deep mistake to suppose on
the strength of this characterization that play is trivial activity and work is
serious. This is a different contrast.
Play is not ‘mere diversion’ because activity without a purpose need not
be pointless. Play has no ‘output’ but it can be structured. In the case of
established games like chess or soccer, and even in the simple games of
small children, there are rules and goals established within the play itself.
For instance, the aim in soccer is to put the ball in the net. Viewed extrinsically – from the outside – this amounts to nothing of any consequence and
has no value. What value could there be in getting a leather ball to cross a
line? This is the sense in which the game is purposeless. But viewed intrinsically, that is within the terms of the game itself, the ball crossing the line is
an achievement, namely a goal. Within the game of soccer scoring goals is
24

