56

To resolve this tension, we need to observe that basic law I cannot be false given how Frege
defined the notions in it. This is the sort of claim that Frege is making as he introduces it—
where indeed, he appeals to the stipulations he made in §12 concerning the conditional
stroke. But surely under different stipulations the same formulas could be false.60
Frege justifies his stipulations by referring to his theory of reference. There, he never
suggests that any natural language meets the standards that he sets for his formal
language.61 Rather he argues that when language is used for scientific purposes it must
meet these standards—a claim which motivates his stipulations. Now, the evidence
supporting Frege’s understanding of scientific language seems to be his own familiarity with
scientific languages and the human mind. He takes for granted claims that, according to
him, reflect uncontroversial facts about scientific discourse. This makes the justification of
basic laws somewhat human-centred. The laws cannot be false in the Begriffsschrift, which
is an ideal language for human scientific discourse. But a different community might not
accept the same claims about scientific language that we accept—for instance, a community
might not accept that in scientific language no term should fail to refer.
Frege repeatedly envisions the possibility of mathematical aliens. He seems to take this as a
nomological possibility, since he considers scenarios in which, as a result of evolution,

60

For instance, Frege postulates that no term in his formal language fails to refer (1893,§5). Should

we remove this assumption, the truth-table of the conditional stroke would change –it would have
to account not only for the cases in which antecedent and consequent are true or false, but also for
the cases in which they fail to refer. This could affect basic law I since Frege appeals to the definition
of the conditional stroke to justify it.
61

For instance, he admits that natural language terms might fail to refer (1892, 40).

