Edmund Runggaldier

The Wittgensteinian and the ontological
(3-dimensional) reaction to the naturalistic
challenge
Abstract: Starting with a trustworthy theory T, Galvan (1992) suggests to read
off, from the usual hierarchy of theories determined by consistency strength, a
ﬁner-grained hierarchy in which theories higher up are capable of ‘explaining’,
though not fully justifying, our commitment to theories lower down. One way
to ascend Galvan’s ‘hierarchy of explanation’ is to formalize soundness proofs:
to this extent it often suffices to assume a full theory of truth for the theory T
whose soundness is at stake. In this paper, we investigate the possibility of an
extension of this method. Our ultimate goal will be to extend T not only with
truth axioms, but with a combination of axioms for predicates for truth and
necessity. We ﬁrst consider two alternative strategies for providing possible worlds
semantics for necessity as a predicate, one based on classical logic, the other on a
supervaluationist interpretation of necessity. We will then formulate a deductive
system of truth and necessity in classical logic that is sound with respect to the
given (nonclassical) semantics.

1 Introduction
In recent decades, the techniques available for studying the functioning of the
human brain have expanded enormously. Powerful new techniques such as
neuroimaging (e.g., fMRI, PET, SPECT) allow neuroscientists to discover how
mental states, cognition and emotion, are mapped on to neural substrata in the
brain.
The more neuroscientists know about the functioning of the brain, the more
they seem to abandon the assumption that there must be something like an Ego
or a Self which is responsible for our actions. This leads to the suspicion that not
we, but our brains, determine and control our doings; not we, but our brains do
the thinking, planning, and acting. It is the brain’s ability to perform all these
functions that makes us human.
This is the message of the new naturalistic branch in philosophy called
“neurophilosophy”. Allied to neurophilosophy are social neuroscience, neuroe-

Edmund Runggaldier: Innsbruck University
DOI: 10.1515/9783110529494-020

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 2/12/18 12:08 PM

