96 / Metaphysics and Horror, or Relating to Fictions

character does, but to a situation in which someone, who is horrified, is
under attack. His mental anguish is an ingredient in the sympathy and
concern that we extend to the character whereas his mental anguish,
however painful we infer it to be, is not an object of his concern. He is
frightened by the monster, but he is not—or, at least, it is not plausible to
suppose that he is—concerned that someone is in anguish. Or, to be more
precise, no part of his concern is generated as the result of entertaining the
thought that someone is in anguish, whereas that is, ex hypothesi, part of our
concern.
In summary, the concept of character-identification does not appear to
have the right logical structure for analyzing our emotional responses to
protagonists in fiction in general and horror fiction in particular.
“Identification” suggests that we fuse with characters or become one with
them which would suggest, at least, that we duplicate their emotional states.
But when we see the monster moving at his emotionally paralyzed victim,
our emotional response takes into account the disabling paralysis of the
victim.
Stated formally, a strong sense of character-identification would imply a
symmetrical relation of identity between the emotions of spectators and
characters. But generally, the relation is asymmetrical; the characters, in part
through their emotions, cause different emotions in spectators. This logical
asymmetry indicates that identification, a symmetrical relation, is not the
correct model for describing the emotional responses of spectators. This is
clearly the case with such characteristic audience responses as suspense and
pathos. Moreover, if the intensity of our response to fictional characters can
be adequately enough explained in those cases without reference to
characteridentification, why should we be forced to postulate characteridentification to account for the same kind of intensity of response in other
cases?37

