Notes / 243
Inversion in Bram Stoker’s Dracula,” in Representations: 8 (Fall 1984); and, Andrew
Griffin, “Sympathy for the Werewolf,” University Publishing, 6 (1979).
The idea here seems to be that with horror fictions we reenact repressions that we have
already undergone in the process of acculturation. That is, the plot of a horror thriller
introduces the monster—a figure of repressed psychic material—only to (in general)
obliterate every vestige of the return of the repressed by the end of the fiction. As we
participate in the story as readers, we reenact the suppression of this psychically troubling
material. In turn, repression, on this view, seems to be pleasurable, and, therefore, having
the opportunity to repress once more what is culturally unacknowledged again gives us
pleasure. Thus the paradox of horror is dissolved by showing that the manifestation of the
horrific, though horrifying, affords a pretext for indulging pleasurable repression which
more than outweighs the reader’s discomfort.
This hypothesis posits that repression is pleasurable. I have no idea whether this is
correct, though it sounds suspicious. It does not seem to be the standard view of repression.
Nevertheless, it may be true; whether it is is beyond the scope of a book like this.
However, it is important to stress that this view apparently contradicts the standard
account of how repression figures in promoting pleasure with respect to horror. In the
standard account, repression is not pleasurable. What is pleasurable is the lifting of
repression. Therefore, it would appear to be ill-advised—without further explanation—to
attempt to combine the repression-reenactment account of horror with the standard
repression hypothesis. That is, repression can’t be pleasurable and unpleasurable at the
same time. Only one—if either—of these hypotheses can be right; which one—if either—
is to be preferred is a debate for psychoanalytic critics and theorists. Since I have
questioned the standard repression hypothesis above, and since I, on admittedly personal
and introspective grounds, question the notion that repression is pleasurable, I shall not
enter this debate.
41

Hume, “Of Tragedy,” pp. 33–34.

42

Hume, “Of Tragedy,” p. 35.

43

With respect to some genres, like tragedy, the pleasure that the Aikins believe we have
derives not from the distressful situation itself but from our response to the distressful
situation. That is, we are distressed by the tragic event, and then we take pleasure in
noting that we are the kind of morally concerned persons who are shaken by such events.
Pleasure in the objects of terror seem more mysterious to them. For they do not see what
it is about our terrified response and what having that response indicates about us that
would give us satisfaction. This difficulty prompts them to search for an account of the
pleasures of distressful, fictional events—of the terrifying variety—in terms of such
narrative elements as suspense.
Interestingly, in a recent paper entitled “The Pleasures of Tragedy”—in American
Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 20, no. 1, January 1983—Susan Feagin opts for a similar view
of the pleasures of tragedy. The pleasure derived here, she believes, is a metaresponse, a
satisfaction with the fact that we react sympathetically to tragic events. Later in the text we
will take up the question of whether or not Feagin’s idea of a metaresponse might not be
useful in dealing with at least some aspects of the paradox of horror.

44

J. and A.L.Aikin, “Of the Pleasure derived from Objects of Terror,” p. 123–24.

45

The special fermata over the discovery/disclosure of the monster in horror narratives is also
in evidence in some of the most standardly employed expositional strategies in movies. For
example, with respect to point of view editing in horror films, J.P.Telotte writes: “one of the
most frequent and compelling images in the horror film repertoire is that of the wide, staring
eyes of some victim, expressing stark terror or disbelief and attesting to an ultimate threat to
the human proposition. To maximize the effect of this image, though, the movie most often

