Holmes’), and then in the same breath betraying that as mere pretense, with the
addition of ‘doesn’t exist’ (1990, 422). The full-blown pretense approach thus seems
to implausibly take as pretenseful precisely the (type 2 and type 4) talk about fiction
that is designed to step outside of the pretense and speak from the real-world
perspective. It also offers contorted and ad hoc readings of what seem to be
straightforward literal claims (cf. Thomasson 2003). So while pretense theories do
well at addressing internal and fictionalizing discourse, they are much less plausible
adopted as across the board approaches—but if we can’t adopt them across the board,
they can’t be used to avoid positing fictional entities.
Various other approaches to fictional discourse have been proposed which
don’t rely on taking pretense to be ubiquitous in fictional discourse, yet still avoid
accepting that there are fictional entities. The best developed of these is Mark
Sainsbury’s (2005) negative free logic approach, which takes as its central motivation
the truth of claims of type (2): nonexistence claims involving fictional names. On the
negative free logic view, fictional names are non-referring terms, and all simple
sentences using non-referring terms are false. Thus ‘Holmes exists’ is false (as
‘Holmes’ doesn’t refer), and so its negation ‘Holmes doesn’t exist’ is true (Sainsbury
2005, 195), leaving us with a far simpler and more plausible account of the truth of
nonexistence claims than pretense views provide. Internal discourse by readers can
still be held to be true even though it involves non-referring names, since these claims
are plausibly held to be implicitly prefixed with a fiction operator, where “According
to the fiction, Holmes solved his first mystery in his college years” may be true even
if the simple claim “Holmes solved his first mystery in his college years” would be
false. Cross-fictional statements can be handled similarly by taking them to fall in the
context of an ‘agglomerative’ story operator that appeals to the total content of the

4

