James Woodward

7. Some applications of CSI
I turn now to more explicit application of these ideas connecting independence to causal
asymmetries beginning with the flagpole problem and CSI. Here I will make use of the following principle (which I take to be motivated by CSI):
(P)38 Suppose there are 3 variables, X, Y and Z such that either (i) X and Y cause Z or (ii) X
and Z cause Y. (In other words there are no omitted common causes etc.) Suppose the patterns of
dependence among these three variables are as follows: X_|_Y, X_/|_Z, Y_/|_Z, where _|_ means
statistical independence and _/|_ means statistical dependence. Then (i) is the correct causal order.

To apply this principle to the flagpole example, I will follow standard presentations of
the problem in assuming that the only two alternatives are that H and A cause (or causally explain) S or that S and A cause H, so that principle (P) applies. (This conforms to
the standard formulation of the problem which asks why we should distinguish (and
prefer qua explanation) a derivation in which H is in the explanans from a derivation
in which S is in the explanans.) Suppose that we observe several flagpoles of different
fixed heights h1...hn, at different times of day for each pole, so that A varies. In this case
for any given A, there will be a correlation between the heights of the poles and the corresponding shadows of lengths s1...sn but no correlation between H and A. As A varies
over the course of the day, we also find, for each pole, a correlation between A and the
length of the shadow cast by that pole. Thus we have the following pattern of independence and dependence relations: H_|_A, H_/|_S, A_/|_S. Applying P, we infer that H
and A cause S.
38

26

This principle and the applications that follow are heavily influenced by Hausman (1998), which remains one of the best discussions of causal asymmetry that I know. Hausman describes the “central intuition” of his account as the claim that “causal priority consists in the causal connection among the
effects of a common cause and the causal independence of the causes of a given effect” (p. 55). Two
events are “causally connected” if one causes the other or they share a common cause; causal independence is the absence of causal connection. The similarity between this idea and P should be obvious.
Nonetheless, there are differences. Hausman holds that causally connected events are “typically” statistically dependent and that causally independent events are not but that this is not always the case—on
his account, the connection between causal independence and statistical independence involves a separate “operationalizing assumption”. P does not have this feature. (The most obvious way in which statistical (in)dependence and causal (in)dependence can come apart involves failures of Faithfulness—
see Spirtes et al., 2000.) Second, and perhaps more importantly Hausman’s account is a proposal about
what causal priority “consists in”. I understand this to mean that if, for example, an event E does not
have two independent causes, there is no fact of the matter about causal direction involving E. Principle P does not have this implication since it does not describe a necessary condition for there to be a
fact of the matter about causal direction. In fact, as explained later, my view is that the causal direction
can sometimes be identified when C is the only cause of E. Within an interventionist framework as
long as there are possible interventions on C that will change E, C causes E; it does not matter if there
are no other causes of E. Even when interventions are not performed and E has no other causes besides
C causal direction can still be well-defined. On the other hand, as suggested above, this is not to say
this notion is well-defined in all possible circumstances.

Theoria, 2022, 37/1, 7-52

