150

RICHARD MONTAGUE

rises, and events in general will form a certain class of properties
of moments of time. I shall say more about the nature of
properties, but this much is clear at the outset. There are in¬
expressible properties; and two properties are identical just in
case they are coextensive in every possible world, not simply if
they are coextensive in the actual world. Thus the two objections
raised in connection with the earlier proposals do not apply here.
One advantage of identifying events with properties of moments
is that it is easy to analyze the notion of occurrence. To say that
an event P occurs at a moment t is simply to say that t possesses
(or partakes of, or participates in) the property P.
What I have had in mind so far are events of only one kind,
what we might call instantaneous generic events. There are other
kinds, for instance, protracted generic events like the American
presidential campaign. Such events should be identified with
properties of intervals, rather than moments, of time (or more
generally with properties of unions of intervals of time) and
present no special problems; nevertheless, we shall avoid con¬
sidering them here. Events of another kind, what we might call
instantaneous individual events, like a rising of the sun, should
not, however, be dismissed, and will be considered later, after
the development of a certain amount of technical equipment.
Before proceeding to pains, tasks, and the like, we must con¬
sider the nature of relations, which have traditionally been
construed in two ways. According to the modern mathematical
use, an n-place relation is a set of sequences of length n; relations
are then understood as extensional objects. According to an older
and perhaps more philosophical use, relations are instead
intensional, in the sense that two different relations can correspond
to a single set of sequences. Relations of the latter sort are some¬
times called relations-in-intension, and I shall use that designation
for them, as well as the term ‘predicate’. (I believe that the
propositional functions of Principia Mathematica should be
understood as predicates; but this contention, like several
other exegetical hypotheses concerning that work, is not beyond
controversy.) Thus predicates will not be linguistic entities;
for the latter we shall reserve such terms as ‘predicate constant’,
‘predicate variable’, and ‘predicate symbol’. One-place predicates

