4

Introduction

of morphogenesis, based on four different areas: biometry; population biology;
mathematical biology; and biocybernetics. The formal-model method, in biometry in particular, had its roots in the epistemological decision of Ronald A. Fisher4
to abandon the Bayesian interpretation of statistics and instead to propose – in
line with the theory of errors that had emerged from works on astronomical observation, and in the wake of the famous article by Student5 on probable error in
the estimation of a mean – a “hypothetical law” for estimating statistical parameters in the case of small sample sizes. In my view, this hypothetical law, which
was explicitly free of any attempt at representation and thus of rootedness in the
actual causal connections, acted as the first detached formalization, or first formal
model in the full sense of the term as it is used in biology. The “hypothetical law”
itself took the form of a frame of reference for field data, and was widely termed
“model” from the end of the 1940s. It was this fictive and detached formalization that would to a large extent serve as a prototype for the other types of formal
model in biology, including in population biology, from the 1920s onward. This
first epoch may be called the “epoch of detachment of formalisms”, since it is
characterized by an increasing and normalized use of this type of formal construct,
known as formal models.
In this context, by “formal model” I am referring to any type of formal construct
of a logical or mathematical format with an axiomatic homogeneity that is capable
of answering certain questions and fulfilling certain functions (cognitive, empirical, communication-related) with respect to an object, a system or an observable
phenomenon. The formal model differs from theory in its validity, which is often
only local, in its prior adaptation to certain questions that are posed at the outset,
and in its inability to directly produce general results in the form of theorems. It
should be pointed out already here that it also differs from simulation, although
the term “simulation” is ambiguous, since it designates both a symbol-processing
operation and the symbolic result of that processing. I will revisit all these points
in greater detail in Chapter 8. We could say that, as a first approach, a computer
simulation – insofar as it is a process – may be seen as a computer-assisted symbolization and formalization technique consisting of two distinct steps. During the
first step, termed operative, symbols that more or less realistically represent elements of an actual or fictive target system interact step by step in accordance with
rules, and these rules themselves may represent certain real or fictive mechanisms
of the target system. Adopting a term used in connectionist artificial intelligence,
I consider that this step is based on a sub-symbolic6 use of certain formalisms and
certain systems of symbols. The second step of a simulation consists of an equally
symbolic processing of the results of the first step. This step may be described as
observational, and it consists of a set of reckonings, measurements, observations or
visualizations regarding the outcome of the first step. The main epistemic function
of the computer simulations that were initially the most widespread, i.e., “numerical simulations”, was to replace impossible formal calculations with measurements
carried out on these interaction results. Thus, these interactions did indeed take
place between symbols that had also been given the status of sub-symbol: they
were sub-symbols from the point of view of the resulting patterns. Not all the

