Archimedean solids
According to Pappus, Archimedes discovered thirteen
solids, besides the five regular ones, that were ‘contained by equilateral
and equiangular, but not similar, polygons’.1 This condition is not a
complete characterization. Pappus then proceeded to enumerate the
various solids in terms of the numbers of faces of each type of regular
polygon, giving the numbers of edges and vertices of the solid. The
solids are shown, with their modern names, in Figures 3.11 and 3.12.
Notice that these figures together contain fourteen polyhedra, for the
rhombicuboctahedron and pseudo-rhombicuboctahedron are noncongruent polyhedra that both have 18 square faces and 8 triangular
faces; thus Pappus’ account could technically describe either. [Hero
of Alexandria ( fl. 62 CE) recorded that Archimedes said that Plato
knew of the cuboctahedron.2 Hero’s report contains inaccuracies: it
claims that Archimedes’ thirteen solids included the five regular solids
and a solid with eight square and three triangular faces. Even if the
statement about Plato’s knowledge of the cuboctahedron is correct,
Archimedes was the first to attempt a systematic study of this class of
polyhedra.]
Pappus’ account is a discussion of how the sphere is the largest
solid with a given surface area, and examines solids that appear ‘regular’ (in an informal sense, not in the technical sense).3 Thus it is
reasonable to conclude that Archimedes was concerned with solids
that can be inscribed in a sphere, in the sense that there is a sphere
passing through all of their vertices. This excludes polyhedra such
as the triangular dipyramid (see Figure 1.7 on page 28). A scholium
to Pappus, which has only partly survived, describes how Archimedes constructed the truncated tetrahedron, cuboctahedron, truncated
octahedron, and truncated cube from the tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, and cube respectively, by truncating them at each vertex by a
specified amount.4 The scholium breaks off before the construction of
the rhombicuboctahedron or pseudo-rhombicuboctahedron, the fifth
solid in Pappus’ order.5 It is plausible, though, that he constructed
the rhombicuboctahedron by truncating the cube along each edge,
then truncating those vertices of the resulting shape that lay on the
diagonals of the original cube.6
It is straightforward to see that if truncation of a regular solid is
uniform, in the sense of being invariant under the symmetries of the
original solid, then it will yield another solid that can be inscribed in
a sphere. So such truncations would have supplied Archimedes with
examples of ‘regular’ solids inscribable in a sphere. And some of these
would have regular faces. But this does not account for two of the
thirteen solids he discovered: the snub cube and snub dodecahedron
cannot be obtained by such a process of truncation.7 Thus Archimedes
cannot have found them in this way. But the solids that he could have
found by uniform truncations would have had the same configuration
of faces at each vertex.
109

Ch. 3

Beauty and Subtlety

Archimedes

1 Pappus, Collection, § V.xix;
trans. Dijksterhuis,
Archimedes, p. 405.

2 Hero, Definitiones,
§ 104, p. 66.

3 Pappus, Collection, § V.xix.

4 Dijksterhuis,
Archimedes, p. 407.
5 Loc. cit.

6 Ibid., p. 408.

7 Cromwell,
Polyhedra, p. 84.

