Foundationalism

11

Probably the most common sort of coherence theory of justiﬁcation views the
justiﬁcation of a given person’s belief as a function of the way that belief
coheres with the rest of what that person believes. But one might also try to
understand justiﬁcation in terms of the way a person’s belief coheres with the
rest of the beliefs of that person’s community, or even the way in which
a person’s belief coheres with the beliefs an ideal believer would have. But if
one starts talking about ideal believers one better not identify the ideal believer
with a person who forms rational beliefs. At least one better not do that if one
wants to avoid the appearance of problematic circularity in one’s account of
epistemically rational beliefs.
A coherence theory of justiﬁcation is distinct from a coherence theory of
truth. The latter tries to understand truth itself in terms of the coherence of
beliefs. A coherence theorist of truth would presumably need to relativize truth
to a belief system and reject as ill formed the idea of something’s being true or
false simpliciter. It is an understatement to suggest that a coherence theory of
truth is a pill too bitter for most philosophers to swallow.
Foundationalists will object to the coherence theory of justiﬁcation in
a number of ways. One sort of objection employs relatively straightforward
thought experiments. Earlier, we appealed to the idea that one doesn’t get
justiﬁed beliefs by inferring conclusions from premises that one would be
wildly irrational to accept. We should also worry about this sort of scenario
when evaluating a coherence theory of justiﬁcation. Paranoid schizophrenics
often have fascinatingly intricate webs of interlocking beliefs. But most of us
are convinced that they don’t get themselves justiﬁed beliefs by weaving
tapestries of thoughts pulled out of thin air.
We have noted already that the coherence theorist needs some sort of
account of what makes one belief cohere with others. Almost all coherence
theorists assume that coherence would minimally involve consistency. One
doesn’t have a coherent system of beliefs when all of one’s beliefs cannot
possibly be true together. Taking that for granted, coherence theorists worry
that mere consistency isn’t enough and that other sorts of mutual support
would be required for justiﬁed belief.10 But Foley (1979) pointed out that
internal consistency among one’s beliefs might not even be necessary for
a belief in one’s set of beliefs to be justiﬁed. Consider the well-known preface
paradox. Most of us who write books try to carefully check the ﬁnal proofs for
typographical errors before we OK the proofs for publication. But some of us
also take care to write in our prefaces that we are quite sure that the book
contains errors somewhere. Those who write this in their preface also might
10

See, for example, BonJour (1985).

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009028868 Published online by Cambridge University Press

