The Significance of Speculation in Biology
What matters to him is that he should use those exact empirical
methods which have proved themselves to be successful in his
science. In principle these are, of course, the same as those used
in the inorganic natural sciences. No biologist will assert that
the results of the physics and chemistry of inorganic nature will

alone suffice to elucidate scientifically the relations of living
things. In organisms we find materials united in the most complex metabolic relations with one another and with the environ-

ment in the form of highly complex open systems of peculiar
hierarchically ordered structure, such as we do not find in non-

living nature. Without the knowledge of living things we should
never have had examples of such structures, and an essential
part of what is given in nature would have remained unknown
to us. The laborious scientific exploration of this field has therefore also given rise to sciences with independent special methods
within the boundaries of natural science as a whole. Nevertheless, no man doubts that even within organisms the same general physicochemical laws hold as in inorganic nature. The elements show the same reactive properties; the same general
kinetic rules hold, and the same thermodynamic relations.
Moreover, the often-cited apparent contradiction to the second
law of thermodynamics holds only if we falsely regard organisms as closed systems. But it vanishes as soon as we consider
the organism with its environment and thus a larger section of
nature.

An argument often brought forward from the side of a philosophy of nature is the seeming “‘improbability” of organisms.
We cannot here discuss the ambiguous use of the notion of probability by many authors. In so far as this objection relates to the
structure of living things and their energy relations, the matter
has been made so clear in recent years from the physiological
side (Biinning, 1949) and from the physical side (Schrodinger,
1944) that a general discussion of it in vague terms should be
superfluous. Structures which are improbable when considered
from the point of view of inorganic models are formed by the
special biochemical and biophysical situation in the organism
and are thus very probable. The peculiarity of organic events
Vol. I, No. 9

64

