30

Philosophy of Physics

structure the matter dynamics presupposes. Neither is more fundamental than
the other, in line with the conclusions drawn previously in this subsection.
The line of inquiry might continue: Isn’t it a coincidence that all matter
ﬁelds involve the same notions of time, distance, and change? Couldn’t there
be notions of these bespoke to particular types of matter? I can think of three
sorts of answers to this second question. The ﬁrst is dismissive:
1. Is this a coincidence worth an explanation? What was one expecting, after
all? If this is a coincidence, it is not unique to GR, but applies equally
to all spacetime theories, relativistic and nonrelativistic. It has been an
adequate modeling assumption for all of these, and there is no clear evidence
otherwise. That’s why Newton, in the Scholium to his Principia, makes this
same assumption.
One can also well resist on conceptual grounds that this is a coincidence, or that
it cannot be explained through a kind of theoretical equivalence. The second
and third answers elaborate on this pair of conceptual responses in particular
ways.
2. If in fact there is only one matter ﬁeld, only one representation of time,
length, and change is needed. Such a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory needn’t have the
strong ambitions of grand uniﬁed theories in particle physics to have a
simple Lie group as the gauge group for matter; allowing product gauge
groups would sufﬁce as long as one could interpret values in this space as
that of a single material ﬁeld. One could argue that this has already been
achieved in the Standard Model of particle physics.
3. Suppose that there were matter ﬁelds with separate notions of time, distance,
and change, and yet those ﬁelds interacted. If it is possible to rewrite their
dynamical equations in terms of a single metric (or metric-like) structure –
representing just one notion of time, distance, and change, perhaps with
extra spacetime structure – then such a theory with, for example, multiple
structures representing time would be equivalent with one with a single such
structure. Some such theories have already been proposed, especially in the
context of problems in cosmology (e.g., Hossenfelder 2008, Hohmann 2014,
Petit & d’Agostini 2014). Brans-Dicke theory (Weinstein 1996) and TeVeS
(Brown 2005, §9.5.2) may also count as examples.17
These sketches of answers deserve fuller pursuit than I can sustain here. It is
worth emphasizing nonetheless that the questions to which they respond do
17

See also Lucas (1973) for an earlier philosophical discussion of the possibility of more than
one temporal structure.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 177.249.162.188, on 23 May 2025 at 04:25:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108954082

