The Physiological Point of View
use of such linguistic expressions. The possibility of empirically
testing them remains instead just the same as for every other
physiological, i.e., empirical scientific, statement. If we wish to
define the concept of ‘‘mood”’ (Stimmung) in a scientifically useful way, we can do this only by correlation with definite experimental observation, and the same holds for the concepts “‘stimu-

lus,” “‘stimulus-perception,”’ etc.
The use of anthropomorphic terms from human psychology is
widespread, especially in the whole of the physiology of the
nervous system and special senses of the higher animal organisms, including man. With a consistent application of fundamental scientific criticism, no difficulties result from the use of

these linguistic expressions. Even the complex behavior of
higher animals can be treated throughout as a problem in purely
empirical science. But that a great danger lies in these anthropomorphic modes of expression, which can lead to a conscious or
unconscious psychologizing of biological facts, will be shown
later (Chap. III, B, 2).
Only in the case of man does a really new problem arise—
from the fact that to him is given a new kind of experience, the
inner experience, in the form of his own feelings and sensations.
One and the same state of affairs can be described in the form of
neurological statements and thus in accordance with empirical
science and the requirement of experimental testability, or it
can be described as sensation in the expressions of psychology.
In this way arises the complex of problems of the correlation of
physiological with psychological experiences, the psychophysical problem. Since this cannot be discussed without a fundamental critical analysis of psychology, we shall not deal further
with it here. It need only be pointed out that an excellent and
unambiguous clarification of the boundaries between the physiological and the psychological points of view from the biological
side has been carried out repeatedly in recent times (e.g., Biinning, 1949).
A special role is played by the physiological standpoint in the
complex problems of developmental physiology, in ecology, and
in the investigation of behavior.
Vol. I, No. 9

19

