48

Philosophy of Physics

the connection coefﬁcients seem to be the wrong sort of mathematical object
for the representational job.
Curiel (2019, §§6–7) provides a different argument that he interprets as
proving the nonexistence of a gravitational energy–momentum tensor. In order
for such a tensor to source the EFE, it must be a twice covariant symmetric
tensor ﬁeld. Further, it must be expressible as a sum of ﬁelds deﬁnable from
the Riemann tensor, Ricci tensor, and the metric, such that it vanishes only
if the Riemann tensor vanishes and is divergence-free in vacuum regions of
spacetime. Finally, he requires that the tensor be invariant under any homothety
gab 7→ λgab for constant λ > 0, suggesting that this mapping represents a mere
change in units. He then proves a theorem with a corollary stating that there is
no tensor ﬁeld satisfying all these constraints.
The theorem is in fact similar to one stated by Aldersley (1977) and later
elaborated by Navarro and Sancho (2008) about the uniqueness of the EFE
as a ﬁeld equation. As Fletcher et al. (2018, §6.1) point out in the context
of the discussion of these results, homothetic transformations represent scale
transformations, not just changes in units. If the cosmological constant Λ , 0
or one considers any matter theories with intrinsic timescales or length scales,
then one wouldn’t expect such transformations to be symmetries as these results
assume.25 Accordingly, Curiel’s argument is not as deﬁnitive as it might at ﬁrst
seem.
There is a different, simple argument against gravitational energy–
momentum, due to Geroch and Malament in its original form (Dewar &
Weatherall 2018, §1). (What follows is a slight variation on this form.) Recall
that the two functions for energy–momentum, uniﬁed in GR, are to be the
source for the EFE and to facilitate the description and explanation of the local
dynamics of matter. First, suppose that gravity contributes as a source to the
EFE. It must then be representable as a twice covariant tensor ﬁeld. Then, in
Ricci-ﬂat, vacuum spacetimes (ones where Rab = 0 and matter ﬁelds vanish),
the gravitational energy–momentum is just Λgab (cf. Baker 2005). But this
expression does not covary with the gravitational phenomena possible in such
spacetimes, such as the presence of gravitational waves of various amplitudes.
(I analyze the case of gravitational waves in more detail in the next subsection.)

25

Curiel (2019) does acknowledge at least the point about the cosmological constant,
countering that one must take Λgab to be simply the energy–momentum content of spacetime
itself. (Aldersley [1977] and Navarro and Sancho [2008] counsel the same.) He does not
acknowledge, however, the tension between afﬁrming spacetime energy–momentum while
denying gravitational energy–momentum. I discuss this option further in the remainder of
this section.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 177.249.162.188, on 23 May 2025 at 04:25:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108954082

