Foundationalism

37

secure foundations and a skepticism with respect to the rest of what we
believe?

4 Traditional Foundationalism and the Challenge of Skepticism
We ended the last section worried that our search for secure foundations on
which to build might leave us in a position where we must try to erect the huge
ediﬁce of our commonsense beliefs on a foundation too small to support the
weight of that ediﬁce. We’ll begin this section by considering whether we
should let a commitment to avoiding skepticism dictate the nature of our
foundationalism. We’ll then look at the tools available to the philosopher trying
to build on foundations. More speciﬁcally, we’ll ask what principles of inference might be plausibly included in the foundations of knowledge and justiﬁed
belief.

4.1 Should We Reject Skepticism from the Start?
Chisholm (1966) famously suggested that the epistemologist should commit at
the outset to making whatever moves are necessary to avoid skepticism. While
the interpretation of Moore (1959) is a bit more complicated, he, too, seemed to
suggest that when a philosophical theory leads to skepticism, that’s a reason to
conclude that something is wrong with that theory.56 Do Chisholm and Moore
have the right approach?
Later in this section, we’ll explore the ways in which traditional foundationalists might try to escape skepticism. But we should begin by reﬂecting on the
question of whether philosophers should reject at the outset any view that leads
to skepticism. Before we do, however, we should very brieﬂy consider different
forms of skepticism.
One can be a skeptic about the possibility of knowledge or a skeptic about the
possibility of justiﬁed belief. One can also be a global skeptic (a skeptic with
respect to the possibility of every sort of knowledge or justiﬁed belief) or a local
skeptic (a skeptic with respect only to certain kinds of knowledge or justiﬁed
belief). The global knowledge skeptic asserts that we don’t know anything at all.
That view seems to entail that we don’t even know that we don’t know anything.
The global skeptic with respect to justiﬁed belief asserts even more dramatically

56

Even if you can’t ﬁgure out precisely what is wrong with that theory. Ironically, perhaps, Moore
was a very traditional sort of foundationalist who understood full well the difﬁculty of recovering
“commonsense” from the foundations to which he was committed. Chisholm, in particular,
might have been heavily inﬂuenced by Reid (1764) who emphasized his commitment to an
epistemology that is guided by “commonsense” and made clear that he found simply absurd the
posturing of philosophical skeptics.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009028868 Published online by Cambridge University Press

