walsh, ariew, matthen: four pillars

2

common denominator is that in all of them ﬁtness explains and predicts change in population
structure. A population that varies in ﬁtness is said to be undergoing selection. When the actual amount of change in such a population diﬀers from the expected change, the population
is said to manifest drift. Over the past ﬁfteen years there has been a considerable amount of
debate about what theoretical population dynamics models tell us about the biological reality of
selection and drift. Two major positions have emerged, the causal and the statistical.
The orthodox, causal approach recommends that these models should be interpreted as descriptions of the causes of population change. On this view, natural selection and drift are forces,
or causal processes, that propel a population through changes in trait frequencies (Sober 1993).
Variation in trait ﬁtness is a measure of the strength of selection. The degree of divergence from
the expected change in trait frequencies measures the eﬃcacy of drift.
Selection and drift, on this view are independent and proprietary population-level causes of
population change (Sober 1993; Stephens 2004). By ‘independent’ we mean that the minimal
conditions suﬃcient for selection to occur can obtain without those that are suﬃcient for drift
(and vice versa). They are proprietary in the sense that each process—selection and drift—has
its own distinct kind of eﬀect, each called after its supposed cause. There is thus a distinction
to be made between selection the process (which is the cause) and selection the product (which
is the eﬀect), and similarly between drift the process and drift the product (Millstein 2002;
Stephens 2004). The important point is that on this orthodox causal approach, the population
models that quantify the degree of selection and drift in a population do so by articulating and
diﬀerentiating the population-level causes of evolutionary change. 2
The statistical interpretation cautions against reading population models in this way. According to statisticalists, the models of population dynamics provide us with a set of statistical
parameters that explain, predict, and quantify changes in population structure, but they do not
do so by representing selection and drift as discrete, separable causal processes. Selection is a
measure of how much change is to be expected in the frequency of a gene or a trait; drift is a
measure of the divergence of the actual change from the expectation.
While the debate between the orthodox and statistical factions has been vigorous, it has not
always been particularly productive or germane. This is due, in some measure, to widespread
misapprehensions of the statisticalist position. These, in turn, may arise from the fact that the
core commitments of the statisticalist position have never been fully assembled and articulated.
Rather, the precepts of the statisticalist view are spread throughout an array of papers by various
(combinations of ) authors. And, as with its causalist counterpart, the various presentations
of statisticalism may encompass a range of minor variations. Our objective here is to state as
clearly and simply as possible what we take to be the shared core commitments of the statistical
interpretation. First, some context is needed. We oﬀer some background to statisticalism in
Sections 2 and 3, before proceeding to an articulation of its central tenets in Section 4.

2

Darwinian and Modern Synthesis Selection

Organisms live, die, reproduce, and pass on their heritable traits to their oﬀspring (sometimes in
mutated form); they immigrate and emigrate. Darwin’s great insight was that in the aggregate
these events are suﬃcient to account for the ﬁt and diversity of organic form. Darwin reasoned
that as a consequence of all this living, reproducing, and (imperfect) inheriting of traits, pop2 There are variants on this. In one version of the orthodox approach natural selection and drift are

said to be two vector forces of evolutionary change (Sober 1993; Millstein 2006; Hitchcock and Velasco
2014). A further variant contends that natural selection is a force, but drift is not (Brandon 2006).

 open access - ptpbio.org

