FREGE AGAINST THE FORMALISTS

227

In fact, it gleams everywhere so distinctly through the husk of
formal arithmetic that we often think we see it alone. We
forget, however, that much having good reason in meaningful
arithmetic is unjustified in formal arithmetic. We constandy
forget the profound differences. Many a reader has perhaps
condemned our references to time as wholly unmathematical—
when, for example, we assumed that the length of a sequence
changes in time. This complaint would be quite justified from
the standpoint of proper or meaningful arithmetic; in formal
arithmetic, however, time is involved by the subject itself. For
while the actual numbers are timeless, numerical figures arise
and pass away in time. The manipulations of the game also take
place in time.

§132

Thomae writes:
The simpliest null sequence is naturally (o o o . . o . .).

Our question is: Does this group of figures designate a
numerical sequence, or is it itself a numerical sequence? Accord¬
ing to the usual usage of signs, the first alternative would be
correct; but since the figure zeros are not signs in this context,
but just figures, we must conclude that Thomae intends the
above group of figures to be a numerical sequence. Is this really
so? We have so far assumed that the numerical sequences consist
of numerical figures and nothing else; but here we also see dots
and parentheses. The latter may perhaps be dismissed as mere
drapery. But what have the dots to do with the numerical
sequence? Are they to represent figure zeros? But then why do
not the figure zeros themselves appear? That would be simpler.
We should then have a sequence consisting of eight figure zeros.
But whether we would then have a null sequence in Thomae’s
sense is questionable. The alternative is not a sequence of
numerical figures, but a row composed partly of numerical
figures and partly of dots. Only the group made up of the first
three figure zeros can be regarded as a numerical sequence;
the fourth figure zero may not be taken as part of the sequence,
for it is separated by dots. Do the dots invite us to imagine

