Frege: An Introduction

to his

Philosophy

consciousness, the question whether it was the same idea in both would remain

unanswerable ... In any case it is impossible for us as men to compare another
person’s ideas with our own ([1918 <j], pp. 351-2 (15). See also [1879-91], p. 6 (5) and
[18926], p. 141 (60)).

On Frege’s own view, communication comes about when the
speaker grasps a Thought and utters the corresponding sentence.

The utterance is perceived by the hearer, who then associates the
sentence with a Thought which he grasps. Of course, in order for
this to

be a case of successful communication, the hearer has to

same Thought with the sentence as the speaker
associated with it. Somewhat earlier, Frege had written that ‘the
associate

the

task of our natural language

is

essentially fulfilled provided that

people communicating with each other connect the same Thought,
or at least a very similar one, with the same sentence’ ([18966], p. 236
(33)).

The question here is this: is anything being genuinely explained
by this account of communication? We are told that we are able to
understand each other because we are able to associate the same
Thoughts with the same sentences. Yet this account really suffers
from the difficulty which worries Frege about the account according to which we communicate our ideas to each other. Frege’s claim
was that the ideas of one man cannot be compared with those of
another. I cannot communicate my ideas to you because you cannot
know what my ideas are. But now consider the communication of
Thoughts. Suppose I grasp a Thought and associate it with a
sentence which I utter. The hearer picks up the sentence I have
uttered, but now he must associate it with a Thought which he too
grasps. Which Thought is he to associate with it? According to
Frege, in the case of successful communication it is the same
Thought that is grasped by me. But how is he to know which
Thought I have grasped? A Thought itself may be an objective
entity, equally available to all, but my grasping of the Thought is
not.

It is

an event which takes place in my own consciousness and,

on Frege’s own account, it is not available to anyone but me. So if
the hearer cannot have access to the contents of my consciousness,
he also cannot have access to a knowledge of which Thought I
associate with the sentences that
utter. In order to explain
I

intersubjectivity Frege has invoked the causal efficacy of Thoughts,

but now it turns out that they cannot serve their intended purpose

because their interaction with our minds is, on Frege’s
account, not available for intersubjective comparison.

164

own

