TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE
What is printed here is a translation of the first volume of Frege’s
posthumous writings and correspondence published by Felix Meiner,
Hamburg 1969, under the editorship of Hans Hermes, Friedrich Kambartel
and Friedrich Kaulbach. Whilst we have naturally translated everything in
the volume which is by Frege’s hand, we have chosen to omit much of the
editorial apparatus. Thus we have not translated the three introductory
exegetical essays by the editors, though we have translated their history of
the Frege Nachlaß—leaving out, however, parts that are taken up with
editorial minutiae and a general discussion of the difficulties of deciding on
dates and titles for some of the pieces. Again, we have not translated all of
their footnotes, many of which are exegetical, though we have translated
such as relate to the composition or dating of the individual pieces, or give
the provenance of some quotation in the text or (where we think it helpful)
the authorship of some view that Frege is discussing. We have, finally,
omitted the bibliography of Frege’s published work and translations thereof.
We ourselves have added footnotes where some difficulty in translation
seemed to call for comment or where we thought one necessary if the reader
was to follow the argument. Asterisked footnotes are Frege’s own;
numbered footnotes are either ours or the editors’ and are marked
accordingly. Matter within square brackets is either editorial or added by
ourselves where we have made some interpolation to assist the reader—as,
for instance, where there is some play on words in the German which is
inevitably lost in the English translation. It should be clear in each case
whether the intervention is ours or the editors’.
We have not thought it necessary to provide the reader with a glossary,
but some key terms call for comment here either because of their inherent
difficulty or because we have adopted different renderings from previous
translators.
First and foremost we have parted company with all previous English
translators of Frege by rendering ‘‘bedeuten’ and ‘‘Bedeutung’ as ‘mean’ and
‘meaning’. We have done this throughout, both before and after he
formulated his celebrated distinction between Sinn (sense) and Bedeutung
(except of course where the obvious translation of ‘Bedeutung' is
‘importance’ or ‘significance’). And cognate terms such as ‘bedeutungsvolF
and ‘gleichbedeutencf we have accordingly rendered by ‘meaningful’ and
‘having the same meaning’. ‘Meaning’ is, after all, the natural English
equivalent for ‘Bedeutung', and renderings such as ‘reference’ and
‘denotation’ are strictly incorrect and have only been adopted by other

