XXXIl

Introduction

of classical antiquity, of medieval Europe and of India—in being able to give
an account of sentences involving multiple generality, an account which
depends upon the mechanism of quantifiers and bound variables: for all the
subtlety of the earlier systems, the analysis of the structure of the sentences
of human language which is afforded by modern logic is, by its capacity to
handle multiple generality, shown to be far deeper than they were able to
attain. The discovery of the mechanism which enabled this analysis to be
given, and the realization of its significance, are due to Frege: if he had
accomplished only this, he would have rendered a profound service to

human knowledge.
Already when Frege started working, mathematicians such as Boole had
for some little time been taking an interest in logic. But it was the discoveries due to Frege which made the subject rich enough to come to be
considered a significant branch of mathematics. There is, of course, no
discrepancy in assigning a single subject to the two different fields of mathe-

matics and philosophy simultaneously. A subject belongs to mathematics
if it is possible to handle it by means of mathematical techniques, and Frege
developed logic to the point where precisely that became possible: a subject
belongs to philosophy, on the other hand, in virtue of the kind of interest

which it has; and, however successful the application of mathematical
techniques to logic may be, nothing can deprive it of the interest it must
have for philosophers.
After these remarks, it may seem paradoxical to list Frege’s achievements
as a philosophical logician as his second title to fame after his discoveries in
mathematical logic. But this would be only a superficial paradox. Both in
logic itself and in the philosophy of mathematics, there necessarily remain
questions which the philosopher asks which cannot be resolved by the
application of mathematical techniques alone, but require a combination of
these techniques with properly philosophical argumentation. Frege’s
practice shows that he was very well aware of this, and a remark in an unpubNS 293 (273)

lished article, that a philosopher innocent of mathematics is only half a philosopher, anda mathematicianinnocent of philosophy only halfa mathematician,
makes the idea explicit—however untrue the remark may be when applied to
other parts of philosophy or of mathematics. Frege’s work in philosophical
logic is a true foundation: despite all the work that has been done in the
subject during this century, Frege’s theories of philosophical logic undoubtedly have to serve as the starting-point for anyone working in this area
even today; in large part, he provides the terms in which the basic problems
can still most fruitfully be posed.
This is of all the greater importance, since the centre of gravity of

