:

Frege: An Introduction

to his

Philosophy

Frege that this could seriously be questioned). Two other axioms
are in the same position. The first says that if a property holds of
everything, it holds of any given thing, while the other says that if a

(second order) property holds of all (first order) properties, then it
holds of any given such property. What of Axiom (V), governing
the relation between a concept and its extension (more generally, a

function and

its

course of values)? Frege never concealed from

himself or from his readers that this axiom did not have quite the

appearance of self-evidence enjoyed by the other axioms. It is a
remarkably powerful axiom in its ability to prove existential
propositions, and this might itself have been a source of worry. Yet

seems to state what is involved in the very notion of a concept
having an extension, and ‘is what people have in mind when they
speak of the extension of a concept’. Frege’s view seems to have
been that if we have any grasp of the extension of a concept, it must
be because this axiom is true. Our understanding of extensions
proceeds from a prior grasp of concepts, via the recognition of
it

Axiom (V). As he says:
By means of a logical faculty we lay hold upon the extension of a concept by
starting out from the concept ([1906c], p. 197 (181)).

So Frege has in mind something like a transcendental argument
a necessary condition for our grasp of extensions is the truth of

Axiom (V). In this way we can understand why the refutation of
the axiom left Frege with a puzzle about how we apprehend logical
objects. In a letter to Russell of 1902 he said

How do we apprehend logical objects ?

I

have found no other answer to it than this.

We apprehend them as extensions of concepts, or more generally as courses of
values of functions. I have always been aware that there are difficulties connected

with this, and your discovery of the contradiction has added to them; but what
other way is there? (p.223 (141)).

The seriousness of Russell’s discovery was thus partly due to the
fact that it showed that we do not have a clear grasp of the relation
between concepts and their extensions; and this seemed to undermine the objective status of Frege’s programme.
of course, mostly conjecture. It is a puzzle about
Frege’s work that he nowhere considers in detail the question of
what justihes our claim to know the truths of logic. Perhaps his
doubts about Axiom (V) made him reticent on the subject. Once,
towards the end of his life, Frege did discuss what he describes as the
All thi s

is,

logical source of knowledge’.

He distinguishes three sources of
190

