38

F r e g e ’s C o n c e p t i o n o f L o g i c

expression of that kind of thing that forms the content of a judgment or assertion. Frege’s “morning star”/“evening star” example is the paradigm of such a
pair of terms.26 Though as we’ll see soon Frege is not entirely clear on this point,
he often writes as if two co-referring terms will have different senses whenever it
takes a nontrivial amount of investigation (which can be entirely a priori) to
determine that they do co-refer. In keeping with this way of thinking of the issue,
Frege sometimes writes of the sense of a singular term as containing a “mode of
presentation” of its reference: the senses of “the morning star” and of “the
evening star” contain two distinct modes of presentation of the planet Venus.27
The reference of a simple piece of language is determined by its sense, at
least in the minimal sense that if two simple pieces of language have the same
sense, then they have the same reference. This, together with the fact that the
sense of a complex linguistic item is determined as above by the senses of its
parts and that the reference of a whole is determined as noted earlier by the
references of its parts, implies the general Fregean thesis that the reference of
any piece of language is determined by its sense: if two linguistic items have the
same sense, they have the same reference. Consider again the sentence “7 is
prime.” Its sense is the thought obtained by putting together the sense of “7”
and the sense of “. . . is prime”; this thought is true, which means that the sentence itself refers to the truth-value true. Equivalently, the reference of “. . . is
prime,” a function determined by the sense of that predicate, when applied to
the reference of “7,” an object determined by the sense of “7,” delivers as value
the truth-value true, which has again the result that the sentence as a whole
refers to that truth-value.
Inspired in part by Frege’s occasional talk of senses as containing “modes of
presentation” of references, it is sometimes thought that on the Fregean view a
linguistic item can have sense only if it has reference.28 But this is a mistake. It is
essential to Frege’s view, and a point about which he is clear, that some pieces of
language have sense despite lacking reference. As Frege says:
It may perhaps be granted that every grammatically well-formed expression figuring as a proper name always has a sense. But this is not to
say that to the sense there also corresponds a reference. The words “the
celestial body most distant from the Earth” have a sense, but it is very
doubtful if there is also a thing they refer to. The expression “the least
rapidly convergent series” has a sense but demonstrably there is
nothing it refers to, since for every given convergent series, another
convergent, but less rapidly convergent, series can be found. In grasping
a sense, one is not certainly assured of referring to anything.29
Fiction too provides as Frege sees it cases of terms that have sense without reference. The term “Odysseus,” for example, assuming that the Odyssey is a work

