Original Sinn

601

subsequent experiences; if this could occur, it would make no difference to
our future expectations whether we dismissed a given experience as illusory
or not.
Quine’s second thesis, which is the basis for his rejection of analyticity, is a
more serious and more difficult matter. Frege held that analytic statements
have sense in the same sense of ‘sense’ as synthetic ones. Wittgenstein
held that they are devoid of sense; and the positivists that they have meaning
as well as contingent statements only under an equivocation over the word
‘meaning’. Seeking to explain the role of analytic statements in language,
the positivists fastened upon their use as elucidatory sentences, serving to
convey some feature of the senses of words contained in them. This would
ordinarily be thought of as applicable only to those analytic statements
which would not normally be regarded as requiring proof: the prototype
would be such a sentence as ‘January has thirty-one days’. Quine agrees
with Frege to this extent, that allegedly analytic and allegedly synthetic
statements play similar roles in language—so similar, indeed, that the
distinction between them cannot be discerned: neither kind of statement
possesses a meaning for itself; both figure only as recipients of truth-values
within a total theory.
There is some justice in the positivist account of the role which analytic
statements are made to play, at least for some uses of some analytic statements ;

and certainly Quine’s rejection of analyticity is tightly connected with his
denial that elucidation is a linguistic operation distinguishable from that of
assertion. It is common for philosophers to remark that assertion is the
primary function of language—that, e.g., we can imagine a language without
questions or commands, but not one without assertions. Quine’s “Iwo
Dogmas’ model of language is, however, one in which assertion is the only
possible form of linguistic act. There is no place for the enunciation or
explanation of the sense which is being attached to some expression: all
must be conceived in terms of assignments of truth-values to sentences.
And that is the fundamental source of its inadequacy.
Quine holds that every sentence is subject to revision. In a sense, this is
obviously true. A child may doubt whether he is right in supposing ‘January
has thirty-one days’ to be the generally accepted sentence; he may also,
familiar perhaps with such changes as that from the Fahrenheit to the
Centigrade scale, easily perceive how it might cease to command general
acceptance. There is no difficulty, at any rate, about the revisability of
those analytic statements whose acceptance depends on proof, e.g. mathematical theorems: the discovery of a mistake in the proof remains, save
in the simplest cases, an open possibility, and, in face of a purported

