7
be the expression of the function. Now of course he has after all put these Greek
letters into the argument places, so it does not have holes in it any longer, it just
looks like the usual expression for an old-fashioned function. (Martin-Löf, 1993,
p.53)
In Martin-Löf’s terminology, the function type interpretation states that Frege’s functions
must be understood in the modern sense. That is, a function name ‘Φ(ξ)’ in the theory of
levels should be regarded as a closed term of some function type τ → σ. Under the open
term interpretation to be defended here, however, Frege’s functions must be taken in the oldfashioned sense, meaning that ‘Φ(ξ)’ is an open term of a type σ depending on a type τ .
Before we can decide which interpretation should be rejected and which should be endorsed
we must take a closer look at Frege’s views on functionality.
3

Frege’s theory of function levels

Now let me return to the discussion of Frege’s theory of function levels. There was an
influential view among Frege’s predecessors that a function is an analytical expression
distinguished by its dependence on variables. It can be found, for instance, in the writings of
Lagrange and Boole, and, as can be seen in Rüthing (1984), traced back to Euler. In an attempt
to avoid the pitfalls of formalism, Frege opposes the idea that functions are expressions already
in Grundgesetze §1. Frege tells us that one will be tempted to rather say that a function is the
meaning or reference of such an incomplete expression. But according to him the problem
with this view is that in ‘(2 + 3x2 )x’ we find a variable ‘x’, which does not refer to an object
as ‘2’ does, for example, but, as he says, “only indicates one indeterminately”.4
The argument places of a function name are from this point on are written with small Greek
letters such as ‘ξ’ and ‘ζ’ throughout Grundgesetze. Therefore, such small Greek letters
only indicate indeterminately. Landini (2012, §2.6) maintains that these Greek letters are
metalinguistic devices used parametrically to facilitate the rule of substitution. They are
therefore not part of the object language of the ideography. As it will be seen in Section 4,
Frege will also speak of Roman letters as signs that only indicate something indeterminately
later in Grundgesetze §8. For Frege, these letters have an entirely different purpose.
Because the argument places of a function name do not refer, Frege rejects the above proposal
and concludes in Grundgesetze §1 that a function is in essence the connection established
between the objects whose names we put for a variable and the objects that then appear as
referents of the now complete expression. Assuming the old-fashioned convention that the
name of a function must always carry an argument place, Frege writes that:
The nature of the function reveals itself, rather, in the bond that it establishes
between the numbers whose signs we put for ‘x’ and the numbers that then result
as the reference of our expression […] The nature of the function lies therefore in
that part of the expression that is present without the ‘x’. (Grundgesetze §1)
4

“nur unbestimmt andeutet” (Grundgesetze §1).

