F r e g e ’s C o n c e p t i o n o f L o g i c

40

out of, or otherwise essentially linked to, two lines and the relation of parallelness, and (dir) as expressing a content similarly tied to two quite different
objects, directions, and the relation of identity.33 One might further be inclined
on this basis to suppose either (1) that the sentences express different contents, or (2) that the superficial grammatical structure of at least one of them
is, after all, misleading. Frege’s view is the perhaps-startling one that the
superficial syntactic structure is in both cases a reliable guide to the composition of the content expressed and that the two sentences express the same
content. The content is just, on this view, decomposable in a variety of ways.
As Frege puts it:
The judgment “line a is parallel to line b,” or, using symbols,

a//b
can be taken as an identity. If we do this, we obtain the concept of direction, and say: “the direction of line a is identical with the direction of
line b.” Thus we replace the symbol // by the more generic symbol = ,
through removing what is specific in the content of the former and
dividing it between a and b. We carve up the content in a way different
from the original way, and this yields us a new concept. Often, of course,
we conceive of the matter the other way round, and many authorities
define parallel lines as lines whose directions are identical. . . . Only the
trouble is, that this is to reverse the true order of things. For surely
everything geometrical must be given originally in intuition. But now I
ask whether anyone has an intuition of the direction of a straight line.
Of a straight line, certainly, but do we distinguish in our intuition
between this straight line and something else, its direction? That is
hardly plausible. The concept of direction is only discovered at all as a
result of a process of intellectual activity which takes its start from the
intuition.34
In short, we first acquire an understanding of the content of sentences of the
form (par), together with an understanding, given via intuition, of the contents
of their singular terms and of their relation-term “. . . is parallel to. . . .” We subsequently arrive at an understanding of the more abstract terms of the form
“the direction of. . . .” via a recognition of the fact that sentences of the form (dir)
express the same content as do their counterparts of the form (par). Directions
are recognized, in short, as what parallel lines have in common, and the Fregean
explanation of this, at least in 1884, is that direction-identity statements share
content with parallel-line statements.
This view that contents are multiply decomposable forms an important part of
Frege’s semantic theory, appearing as early as Begriffsschrift and surviving the
change to the mature version of that theory. At Begriffsschrift §9, Frege writes:

