Sources of Knowledge of Mathematics

369

deceptive. For our thinking is closely bound up with language and thereby
with the external world of the senses. Perhaps our thinking is at first a
form of speaking which then becomes an imaging of speech. Silent think¬
ing would in that case be speech which has become noiseless, taking
place in the imagination. Now we may of course also think in mathem¬
atical signs; yet even then thinking is tied up with what is perceptible
to the senses. To be sure, we distinguish the sentence as the expression
of a thought from the thought itself. We know we can have various
expressions for the same thought. The connection of a thought with one
particular sentence is not a necessary one; but that a thought of which
we are conscious is connected in our mind with some sentence or other
is for us men necessary. But that does not lie in the nature of the thought
but in our own nature. There is no contradiction in supposing there to
exist beings that can grasp the same thought as we do without needing
to clad it in a form that can be perceived by the senses. But still, for
us men there is this necessity. Language is a human creation; and so
man had, it would appear, the capacity to shape it in conformity with
the logical disposition alive in him. Certainly the logical disposition of
man was at work in the formation of language but equally alongside this
many other dispositions - such as the poetic disposition. And so lan¬
guage is not constructed from a logical blueprint.
One feature of language that threatens to undermine the reliability of
thinking is its tendency to form proper names to which no objects cor¬
respond. If this happens in fiction, which everyone understands to be
fiction, this has no detrimental effect. It is different if it happens in a
statement which makes the claim to be strictly scientific. A particularly
noteworthy example of this is the formation of a proper name after the

|H0

pattern of ‘the extension of the concept a', e.g. ‘the extension of the con¬
cept fixed star1. Because of the definite article, this expression appears
to designate an object; but there is no object for which this phrase |
could be a linguistically appropriate designation. From this have arisen
the paradoxes of set theory which have dealt the death blow to set the¬
ory itself. I myself was under this illusion when, in attempting to pro¬
vide a logical foundation for numbers, I tried to construe numbers as
sets. It is difficult to avoid an expression that has universal currency,
before you learn of the mistakes it can give rise to. It is extremely diffi¬
cult, perhaps impossible, to test every expression offered us by language
to see whether it is logically innocuous. So a great part of the work of a
philosopher consists - or at least ought to consist - in a struggle against
language. But perhaps only a few people are aware of the need for this.
The same expression - ‘the extension of the concept fixed star’ - serves
at the same time to illustrate, in yet another way, the fatal tendency of
language to form apparent proper names: ‘the concept fixed star’ is, of
itself, one such. The definite article creates the impression that this phrase

