11
When he introduces basic law I, Frege argues that it cannot be false given how he defined the
notions in it. Namely, he appeals to the stipulations he made in §12 concerning the conditional
stroke. Under different stipulations the same formulas could be false.31
Frege justifies his stipulations by referring to his theory of reference. There, he argues that when
language is used for scientific purposes it must meet these standards, a claim which motivates his
stipulations. Now, the evidence supporting Frege’s understanding of scientific language seems to be
his own familiarity with scientific languages and the human mind. He takes for granted claims that,
according to him, reflect uncontroversial facts about scientific discourse. This makes the justification
of basic laws somewhat human-centred. The laws cannot be false in the Begriffsschrift, which is an
ideal language for human scientific discourse. But a different community might not accept the same
claims about scientific language that we accept; for instance, a community might not accept that in
scientific language no term should fail to refer.
Frege repeatedly envisions the possibility of mathematical aliens. He seems to take this as a
nomological possibility, since he considers scenarios in which, because of evolution, humans could
come to believe that 2x2=3 or 2x2=5 (1884, xviii-xix; 1906b, 175). He always emphasises that
arithmetical truths, and logical, are ontologically independent from human beliefs. But here he is
asking how we can justify our mathematical and logical beliefs. Having agreed that some unspecified
truths of arithmetic are mind-independent, the question remains open as to whether we are right to
think that, say, the sentence ‘2x2=4’ corresponds to a truth of arithmetic, rather than ‘2x2=3.’ Frege
attempts to show that ‘2x2=4’ must be true in a language that meets our basic scientific standards.
But he also admits that this only proves that we must take it to be true. It hardly proves that ‘2x2=4’
in fact corresponds to a mathematical truth, let alone showing that logical aliens are impossible.
Frege’s reason to believe the basic laws, even though logical aliens are possible is this: the claim that
ideal humans must assert laws that quantify over any object whatsoever, paired with the rejection of
skepticism, leads to the conclusion that said laws are true. Suppose that ideal humans can never
assert ~P->P, but in fact some particular sentences fail to entail themselves. Ideal humans could
never identify the anomalous cases, since as far as they are concerned, the basic laws are universally
valid. This casts a doubt over all their beliefs. Anything at all that is given to us in scientific belief is
subject to the basic laws, and to the laws of mathematics. Therefore, in Frege’s framework, doubting
the basic laws amounts to doubting the human epistemic standpoint as a whole.
On lines ten and eleven, Frege observes that although we cannot exclude the possibility of logical
aliens, we are unable to suppose that they might be right. This is a consequence of the weak
normativity of descriptive laws. If one accepts a law, one thereby accepts that everybody ought to
accept it (lines fifteen and sixteen). Therefore, since ideal humans are bound to assert laws of logic,
we, non-ideal humans, may conclude that logical aliens believe something that they ought not to.
Unlike ideal calculators, we can mistake a contradiction for a law. That is, we might assert something
that we would realize we ought not to, if we reasoned unimpeded by psychological limitations. Yet,
we know that logical aliens are wrong because, by definition, they reject laws that ideal humans
accept, whatever these laws might turn out to be. This is still human-centric. By the reasoning above,
we cannot prove that logical aliens are wrong, but we are bound to take them to be wrong. And,
conversely, they believe that we are mistaken. We are both stuck in our epistemic standpoints.
Now, we might be unable to rule out the possibility that our epistemic standpoint is grossly
mistaken. But, says Frege speaking for himself now, questioning our epistemic standpoint is
unadvisable; it would be as unadvisable as to try jumping out of one’s skin (lines thirteen and
fourteen). If we are to do science, we better assume that there is nothing preventing us in principle
from accumulating knowledge. Rather than attempting a refutation of skepticism of the sort that
Kant tried to produce time and time again,32 Frege suggests disregarding skepticism.

