

  

) gloss the central question of this debate as whether “friends have a doxastic duty
to overestimate each other.”
Overestimation plays a role in the epistemic context of friendships. But to reduce it
to this single issue risks flattening the richness and phenomenological character of
engaging with friends, as compared to strangers, or people who are hostile toward
us. Philosophical friendships show that reasoning with your friends indeed is subject
to a distinctive set of norms and practices, but these do not merely amount to
overestimating what your friends tell you. Good friends challenge and push each
other too, often more vigorously and persistently than strangers would, because of the
background of trust they share.
We can see such relational modes of understanding and knowing in Hanne De
Jaegher’s () terms of an existential overlap between loving and knowing. As she
points out, we still do not adequately understand the cognitive mechanisms by which
humans relate to and understand other living beings. Relational understanding clearly
comes with a unique set of attitudes and skills that are not involved when we
understand things we do not have a relationship with. As De Jaegher shows
through several case studies (such as the care of patients with dementia, where we
can continue to connect with them on a sophisticated emotional level even when they
are no longer verbal), relational understanding allows for remarkable cognitive
achievements.
A key virtue in learning to relate to others is letting others be. Drawing on an
example of Kym Maclaren (), De Jaegher considers a horse trainer who trains a
horse, never allowing it to freely roam or to relax. His efforts fail. The horse becomes
more and more sullen; eventually it breaks down. To engage with a horse, you need to
allow it space to be itself, to roam freely and just be a horse. You should not try to
overdetermine it as you try to shape and influence it. The example of the horse trainer
applies a fortiori to friendships: friends should not try to dominate each other or seek
to overdetermine each other, but let the other be. This is not a form of disengagement
or lack of interest, but rather a going with the flow, born from a deep mutual interest
and a realization that our friends remain, no matter how close we are, distinct
individuals and beyond our control.
We can see how letting be philosophical friends plays out in the mutual respect,
often even love, that arises in the context of philosophical disagreements. For
example, William James and Josiah Royce had a long and friendly dispute on
metaphysics, called the “battle of the absolute.” Royce was a proponent of
absolute idealism, the monistic thought that everything can be metaphysically
situated in a single all-encompassing consciousness. By contrast, James was a
pragmatic pluralist who saw the world as a plurality of beings that we, as limited
organisms, form partial pictures of. After helping to secure a position for Royce at
Harvard, James engaged in fierce debate with his friend, publicly discussing on street

This is a very Zhuangzian thought. In chapter , Zhuangzi (fl. th c. BCE) recounts the story of a horse trainer,
Bo Le, who does not respect the nature of horses, which is “chomping the grass and drinking the waters, prancing
and jumping over the terrain” but rather, he “proceeds to brand them, shave them, clip them, bridle them, fetter
them with crupper and martingale, pen them in stable and stall—until about a quarter of the horses have dropped
dead” (Ziporyn : chapter , ).

https://doi.org/10.1017/apa.2024.13 Published online by Cambridge University Press

