Fallacies

A fallacy is just a mistake in reasoning. Humans are not nearly as rational as we’d like to
suppose. In fact we are so prone to certain sorts of mistakes in reasoning that philosophers and
logicians refer those mistakes by name. For now I will discuss just one by name but in a little
detail. Watch for explanations of other fallacies over the course of the class. For pretty thorough
catalogue of logical fallacies, I’ll refer to you The Fallacy Files
(http://www.fallacyfiles.org/taxonomy.html).
“Ad hominem” is Latin for “against the man.” It is the name for the fallacy of attacking the
proponent of a position rather than critically evaluating the reasons offered for the proponent’s
position. The reason ad hominem is a fallacy is just that the attack on an individual is simply not
relevant to the quality of the reasoning offered by that person. Attacking the person who offers
an argument has nothing to do whether or not the premises of the argument are true or support
the conclusion. Ad hominem is a particularly rampant and destructive fallacy in our society. What
makes it so destructive is that it turns the cooperative social project of inquiry through
conversation into polarized verbal combat. This fallacy makes rational communication
impossible while it diverts attention from interesting issues that often could be fruitfully
investigated.
Here is a classic example of ad hominem: A car salesman argues for the quality of an automobile
and the potential buyer discounts the argument with the thought that the person is just trying to
earn a commission. There may be good reason to think the salesman is just trying to earn a
commission. But even if there is, this is irrelevant to the evaluation of the reasons the salesman is
offering. The reasons should be evaluated on their own merits. Notice, it is easy to describe a
situation where it is both true that the salesman is just trying to earn a commission and true that
he is making good arguments. Consider a salesman who is not too fond of people and cares little
for them except that they earn a commission for him. Otherwise he is scrupulously honest and a
person of moral integrity. In order to reconcile himself with the duties of a sales job, he carefully
researches his product and only accepts a sales position with the business that sells the very best.
He then sincerely delivers good arguments for the quality of his product, makes lots of money,
and dresses well. This salesman must have been a philosophy major. The customer who rejects
his argument on the ad hominim grounds that he is just trying to earn a commission misses an
opportunity to buy the best. The moral of the story is just that the salesperson’s motive is
logically independent of the quality of his argument.

Review and Discussion Questions

1. How does dialectic differ from debate?
2. What is it for a claim to be true? How does this issue differ from that of determining
whether a claim is true?
3. Explain our everyday concept of truth in terms of correspondence.
20

