puzzles and problems with the goal of better understanding how things could or could not be.
Metaphysicians are in the business of exploring the realm of possibility and necessity. They are
explorers of logical space.

Epistemology

Epistemology is concerned with the nature of knowledge and justified belief. What is
knowledge? Can we have any knowledge at all? Can we have knowledge about the laws of
nature, the laws or morality, or the existence of other minds? The view that we can’t have
knowledge is called skepticism. An extreme form of skepticism denies that we can have any
knowledge whatsoever. But we might grant that we can have knowledge about some things and
remain skeptics concerning other issues. Many people, for instance, are not skeptics about
scientific knowledge, but are skeptics when it comes to knowledge of morality. Later in this
course we will entertain some skeptical worries about science and we will consider whether
ethics is really in a more precarious position. Some critical attention reveals that scientific
knowledge and moral knowledge face many of the same skeptical challenges and share some
similar resources in addressing those challenges. Many of the popular reasons for being more
skeptical about morality than science turn on philosophical confusions we will address and
attempt to clear up.
Even if we lack absolute and certain knowledge of many things, our beliefs about those things
might yet be more or less reasonable or more or less likely to be true given the limited evidence
we have. Epistemology is also concerned with what it is for a belief to be rationally justified.
Even if we can’t have certain knowledge of anything (or much), questions about what we ought
to believe remain relevant.

Ethics

While epistemology is concerned with what we ought to believe and how we ought to reason,
Ethics is concerned with what we ought to do, how we ought to live, and how we ought to
organize our communities. Sadly, it comes as a surprise to many new philosophy students that
you can reason about such things. Religiously inspired views about morality often take right and
wrong to be simply a matter of what is commanded by a divine being. Moral Relativism, perhaps
the most popular opinion among people who have rejected faith, simply substitutes the
commands of society for the commands of God. Commands are simply to be obeyed, they are
not to be inquired into, assessed for reasonableness, or tested against the evidence. Thinking of
morality in terms of whose commands are authoritative leaves no room for rational inquiry into
how we ought to live, how we ought to treat others, or how we ought to structure our
communities. Philosophy, on the other hand, takes seriously the possibility of rational inquiry
into these matters. If philosophy has not succeeded in coming up with absolutely certain and
definitive answer in ethics, this is in part because philosophers take the answers to moral
6

