well-studied variety of ways of acquiring their species-specific songs: the
vocalizations of seagulls and chickens, for instance, are entirely instinctual
and need no acoustic model to develop, while the fledglings of most other
species have an “instinct to learn” (as ethologist Peter Marler put it) but need
to hear their parents sing their species-specific song. Experiments in cross
fostering place eggs from two different species in the “wrong” nests and
reveal that the hatchlings copy their foster parents’ song as best they can. A
wide variety of animal dispositions (ways of behaving) that were long
thought to be genetically transmitted “instincts” have proven to be
“traditions” transmitted between parent and offspring via perceptual
channels, not genes (Avital and Jablonka 2000), but in none of these species
are there more than a handful of such acquired ways of behaving.
We Homo sapiens are the only species (so far) with richly cumulative
culture, and the key ingredient of culture that makes this possible is language.
Thanks to our accumulating human culture, we have engulfed the planet,
transforming the environment and also triggering an extinction event that
may soon rival the mass extinctions of earlier eons if we don’t take steps to
reverse some of the trends. Our species has had a sustained population
growth unprecedented in any vertebrate species (aside from our chickens,
cows, and pigs). In the last two centuries our numbers have swelled from a
billion to over seven billion, and while the rate is now slowing significantly,
we will reach eight billion in less than a decade, according to the latest
estimates from the United Nations.
Our genes haven’t changed very much in the last 50,000 years, and the
changes that have occurred were probably all driven directly or indirectly by
new selection pressures created by human cultural innovations, such as
cooking, agriculture, transportation, religion, and science. The widespread
adoption of a new way of behaving creates a one-way ratchet: once almost
everybody is eating cooked food, the human digestion system evolves,
genetically, to make it no longer practical—and then no longer possible—for
humans to live on a raw diet. Once transportation moves people around the
world, first populating all the islands and continents, and then
visiting/invading all the islands and continents, it is no longer possible for
human beings to live without a host of defenses against the diseases brought
by travelers.
One of the facts of life, both genetic and cultural, is that options become
obligatory. A clever new trick that gives its users a distinct advantage over

