THE EMERGENCE OF THE FAR EAST IT COMMUNITY
IN THE LATE SOVIET PERIOD
The institutional development of academic knowledge in Primorye, which
literally means “close to the sea,” started early in the Soviet period: in 1923,
the Far Eastern Department of the Acad­emy of Sciences (as) of the USSR
was founded. For several de­cades, it prioritized “studying the productive resources of the Far East for the needs of the ­people’s economy of the region.”3
This regional but also quasi-­colonial approach prioritizing the exploration
of local natu­ral resources lasted ­until the 1970s, when the emphasis shifted
­toward fundamental research in natu­ral and hard sciences and the training
of local academicians. Eventually, in the early 1970s, several new as institutes ­were established, including the Institute of Chemistry and the Institute
of Automation and Control Pro­cesses, equipped with a computing center.
Following the usual Soviet practice of postgraduate professional placement,
new gradu­ates from the country’s best universities ­were assigned to work in
the region.
Artur, a sixty-­
six-­
year-­
old researcher at the as Institute of Applied
Mathe­matics, recalls: “When I came ­here in 1972 it was a kind of a landing
of troops: I was one of a hundred ­people from the leading universities of
Moscow, Leningrad, and Novosibirsk and a few ­people from Kiev. Well, this
group was soon to play its role.”
To host the arriving young specialists, often relocating with their families, a new academic campus was constructed in the suburbs of Vladivostok.
It soon became a hotspot center of local cultural and public life: “Creating
the Far-­Eastern scientific center stirred up the cultural life of the city [quite
a bit], and [gave rise to] vari­ous youth organ­izations. In the 1970s, enthusiastic scientific workers created a ‘Club of friends of cinema,’ Vostok (‘The
East’), ‘Club of fans of ballet,’ and a folk songs movement was expanding.
­These initiatives mostly belonged to the new-­comers” (Kuznetsov 2014, 148).
The newly constructed campus was inspired by the model of Novosibirsk
Akademgorodok (see Indukaev, this volume) and other late Soviet science
cities: they ­were designed as “green cities” con­ve­nient for intensive intellectual life but also suitable for the development of informal, social, and neighborly networks. The memoirs of the former residents of ­these cities are rich
in descriptions about a dense local academic and cultural life.
In the 1970s and 1980s, a community of it experts emerged in Vladivostok thanks to the institutional and professional interactions of specialists
working within the academic context—in the research centers of the Acad­
1 1 4    < m as a l s kaya a n d vas i ly e va >

