analysis; the graphs are ready to print and publish, yet you couldn’t explain in
detail how it works, repair it if it broke, and it is not clear that anybody else
could either. This possibility was always staring us in the face, of course;
things we “make by hand” (boats, bridges, engines, symphonies) we can
(more or less) control as we construct, understanding each step along the
way. Things we “make the old-fashioned way” (children, grandchildren, …)
defy our comprehension because of our obliviousness to the details of the
processes that create them. Today, we are generating brain-children, and
brain-grandchildren, and brain-great-grandchildren that depend on processes
we cannot follow in detail, even when we can prove that the results are
trustworthy.
The use of computers in research has generated several quite distinct kinds
of challenges to Feynman’s maxim. Some mathematical proofs executed (in
part or entirely) by computer are simply too long for a single human
mathematician to check each step, which has been, for good reason, the
standard of acceptance for several thousand years. What should give? A
famous case is the computer-assisted proof in 1976 of the four-color theorem
first discussed by Möbius in the 1840s: Any map of contiguous areas
separated by shared boundaries can be colored in with just four colors such
that the same color never appears on both sides of a boundary. After many
failed proofs by some of the world’s cleverest mathematicians, Kenneth
Appel and Wolfgang Haken harnessed a computer to deal with and dismiss
the nearly 2,000 different possibilities that had to be ruled out, as they
themselves had proven. For some years, their proof was not generally
accepted because it seemed to involve a humanly uncheckable series of steps
by the computer, but the wide consensus among mathematicians today is that
this is a proven theorem. (And alternative proofs have since been constructed,
also using computers.) This was an “intuitive” result: nobody had managed to
produce a clear counterexample in spite of person-centuries of trying, so most
mathematicians figured it was true long before it was proven. But there are
also counterintuitive theorems that have been proven with the help of
computers. In chess, for instance, the fifty-move rule, which declared any
game a draw that proceeded for fifty moves without a capture or pawn move,
was long viewed by experts as more than generous, but it was upset by the
discovery—thanks to computer analysis—of some mating nets (winning
series of moves by one side that cannot be escaped once entered), that
involve no captures or pawn moves and exceed fifty moves by hundreds of

