found loyal users it can rely on. However, in the early stage, civic proj­ects
emerge and are built on a volunteer basis, as “stigmergic collaborations”
(Eliott 2006)—­a concept used to describe a spontaneous self-­organization
within open source and civic-­hacking communities based on indirect incentives and mutual support (Eliott 2006; Gregorio 2002; Heylighen 2007b;
Parunak 2006; Robles, Merelo, and Gonzalez-­Barahona 2005). The proj­ects
I have studied ­were launched as decentralized collaborations of individuals through GitHub, HabraHabr, Stake Overflow, Livejournal, mailing lists,
groups in Vkontakte, and other online ecosystems, without a predetermined
technical task or a strict division of l­abor. Typically, an idea is proposed on
a blog, a team is quickly formed, a page on GitHub is opened, and the work
starts with crucial input from the broader it community. Users and testers
become coproducers and participate in the maintenance and improvement
of the proj­ect.
The collaborative and stigmergic nature of civic software extends to its
business model. The apps I have studied ­were ­either supported by crowdfunding (RosYama, RosZKH, RosPil), grants and prizes (Krasivyy Peterburg, which won the Kudrin’s Innovation Prize), or financial support from
it entrepreneurs. Globally, no efficient and sustainable business model has
yet been found for civic applications. This supports the thesis on “lack of
conditions that facilitate technological innovation” outlined by Marina Fedorova in her chapter on Yandex (this volume). Instead, the civic hacking
scene operates on “enthusiasm.” My respondents claim to work “for themselves” and “for the soul,” but also “for the country” and “for the ­people.” For
instance, Timofey T. (the backend developer of WebNabludatel) explains:
I thought it was the best ­thing I could do to fight against . . . ​how to say . . . ​
the regime. ­Really, without joking. I could have said that it was just for fair
elections, but ­these are just words. It was the only ­thing I could do to fight
against the regime. And I worked for ­free, I even gave a hundred bucks to
pay for the servers.

For ­others, the motivation comes from a mix of po­liti­cal commitment
and technical challenge. The “nonprofit gusto” described by Andrey Indukaev in his chapter on Tomsk (this volume), is a very relevant trait for civic
hackers who share with Siberian computer scientists a specific attraction to
prob­lem solving, where technical complexity and social importance of a
given task constitute a more impor­tant value than the monetization of the
work. As Alexander M. (developer of OpenSalary, an application that provides information on teachers’ salaries) puts it:
9 4    < K s e n ia E r m o s h i na >

