‘1HE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY

255

sponse to Hume’s problem, and proves the reasonableness of inductive behaviour .
The notion of exchangeability is the necessary step from a subjective view to a full-fledged subjective interpretation of probability,
for it is exchangeability that guarantees the applicability of subjective probability to practical situations, especially to those encountered within experimental science. Exchangeability is the missing
aspect in Ramsey’s perspective, that which could have made him
see the connection between degree of belief and frequency that
-among other things-would have indicated how degree of belief
can be justified on pragmatical grounds.
By way of a conjecture, one might say that at the end of his life
Ramsey was not only looking for a notion like exchangeability, but
indeed came close to it. Evidence that he was intrigued by the
relationship between frequency and degree of belief is to be found
in “Miscellaneous notes on probability” written in 1928 (in Ramsey
1991a). There he distinguishes four kinds of connections, namely:
“(1) if degree of belief = y, most prob((ab1e)) frequency is y (if
instances independent). This is Bernoulli’s theorem; (2) if freq((uency)) has been y we tend to believe with degree y; (3) if
freq((uency)) is y, degree y of belief is justified. This is Peirce’s
definition; (4) degree y of belief means acting appropriately to a
frequency y”. And he adds: *‘Itis this last which makes calculus of
frequencies applicable to degrees of belief” (Ramsey 1991a, p.
275). Now, the result that tells us exactly how to treat the relation
(4) is the representation theorem. It then seems that Ramsey would
have found an answer to at least part of what he was looking for in
the results that de Finetti was working out in the same years, but he
did not have the chance to know.
It is nevertheless interesting to point out that Ramsey knew the
property de Finetti calls ‘exchangeability’. H e probably took it from
his teacher and colleague W. E. Johnson, whose ‘permutation
postulate’ is equivalent to Carnap’s symmetry and de Finetti’s exchangeability. Another note by Ramsey, bearing the title “Rule of
succession” (see Ramsey 1991a), contains a derivation of Laplace’s
rule of succession from the notion in question, named by him
‘equiprobability of all permutations’.

