A TEX intro (Canadian spelling)

Section 8: To err is human

the same as if no opening brace were there; that is, the rest of the paper will be boldface if
no other font changes are made. You will get the following message at the end of the file:
(\end occurred inside a group at level 1)
If you had made the same mistake twice, then there would be two more opening braces
than closing braces, and you would get the message:
(\end occurred inside a group at level 2)
TEX doesn’t know that the closing brace is missing until it reaches the end of the
input file. Hence the message doesn’t tell you where you went wrong. If the location of
the missing brace isn’t obvious, it’s always possible to insert \bye halfway through your
document. Running TEX again will cause only the first half to be processed, and if the
error message persists, you will know that the error is in the first half of the document. By
moving the \bye to different places, the error can be localized. Also, looking at the output
often reveals what has gone wrong.
Missing opening braces are much easier to spot. Here is a two line input file and the
resulting error and help messages:
\bf Here is the start}, but there is the finish.
\bye
! Too many }’s.
l.1 \bf Here is the start}
, but there is the finish.
? h <CR>
You’ve closed more groups than you opened.
Such booboos are generally harmless, so keep going.
It’s quite possible, of course, that the line that is supposed to have the missing left
brace will not be on the line where TEX catches the error.
A mismatched brace in the definition of a new control sequence can cause a major error.
Since such a definition may include several paragraphs, it may not be caught by the end
of a paragraph, but, rather will just keep piling more and more text into the unfinished
definition. It’s even possible for TEX to run out of memory as it keeps eating up more
text! This is called a “runaway definition”. Here is a two line input file with a runaway
definition:

66

TEXbook: 206

