28

Philosophy and Logic

and Peano Arithmetic – a mark of Gödel’s continuing throughout the paper, to
grapple with the scope of Theorem VI.
2.4.1 The Mysterious Footnote 48a
It was just here at the end of section 2 of the paper that Gödel is moved to
explain, in a footnote, “the true reason for the incompleteness in all formal
systems of mathematics.” Footnote 48a of 1931 reads as follows:

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108981972 Published online by Cambridge University Press

As will be shown in part II of this paper, the true reason for the incompleteness inherent in all formal systems of mathematics, is that the formation of
ever higher types can be continued into the transfinite (see Hilbert [63], p.
184), while in any formal system at most denumerably many of them are
available. For it can be shown that the undecidable propositions constructed
here become decidable whenever appropriate higher types are added (for
example, type ω to the system P). An analogous situation prevails for the
axiom system of set theory.

Part II of the paper, which was to include a detailed proof of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem,86 would never materialize – but this is not our concern here. What is striking about the remark is the degree of knowledge of
certain logical machinery that was completely unknown at the time. In Section
1, we noted Gödel’s anticipation of Tarski’s Undefinability of Truth Theorem,
which is needed for the first informal proof of the First Incompleteness Theorem. Footnote 48a suggests model-theoretic knowledge going beyond this.
Or what model-theoretic machinery is needed to verify the above claim for
decidability of undecidable propositions in higher types?
Before turning to these questions, it may be worth pointing out that Gödel
demonstrated something of a penchant throughout his career for mentioning
important metamathematical results in footnotes and casual asides in lectures,
without proving them. His 1946 Princeton Bicentennial Lecture [44], in which
Gödel asks for absolute notions of provability and definability, is a case in
point. Among the assertions there is the claim that ordinal definability is itself
definable, a fact that is nowadays shown using the Levy Reflection Principle,
which was proved by Levy in 1960 [88].87 Gödel asserts, and not conjectures,
here the independence of the axiom of constructibility, V = L.88 Another conjecture is that HOD, the class of hereditarily ordinal definable sets, will be a
model of set theory satisfying choice, giving a simpler consistency proof of
86

See the section titled “The Second Incompleteness Theorem” below.
The principle says that for every n there are arbitrarily large ordinals α such that Vα ≺n V.
88 In this connection see Gödel’s letter to Wolfgang Rautenberg of June 30, 1967, in [47], p. 183.

87

