https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108981972 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems

59

and that are mathematical in flavor, is amply rewarded in set theory. That is, in
addition to Gödel sentences involving consistency or asserting unprovability
of the Gödel sentence, a fairly large number of natural, set-theoretical independent statements have been found. One such has been discussed already in
Section 5.1, namely the Second Incompleteness Theorem in the form of the
unprovability of the existence of inaccessible cardinals. But others were soon
to follow, particularly after the invention of forcing in 1963.
Before turning to the most prominent of these, namely the continuum hypothesis (CH), note that the existence statement for any so-called large cardinal,
from Mahlo and weakly compact up to supercompact and beyond, will be independent of ZFC, as these are all inaccessible. So here is a plethora of naturally
occurring independent set-theoretical statements. As for the CH, due to Cantor
and first on Hilbert’s famous list of open problems given at the Paris ICM in
1900, it states that an infinite set of real numbers must either be countable, or
of the same size as the entire set of real numbers. Gödel showed in 1937 [41]
that the CH cannot be disproved from the axioms of ZFC, that is, ZFC + CH is
consistent. Cohen proved the consistency of ZFC + not-CH in 1963, for which
he won a Fields Medal.
Is the CH important for mathematics? As it turns out, mathematicians seem
to do very well in spite of not knowing the size of the continuum – the size,
that is, as measured by the ℵ-hierarchy, as of course it can easily be shown
that the continuum is of size 2ℵ0 . In a situation analogous to the case of mathematical incompleteness relative to Peano Arithmetic, set theorists began to
search for independence results of a more concrete nature – statements that are
entirely mathematical, in Tarski’s sense of mathematical, but not involving, for
example, cardinality. The following is a sample of some of these.
Borel’s conjecture that strong measure zero sets are countable. A subset
A of the real line is said to be of strong measure zero if for every sequence
αn of positive reals there exists a sequence In , n ∈ N of intervals such that
∪
|In | < αn for all n and A ⊆ In . Borel conjectured that every strong measure
zero set is countable. As it turns out this is independent of ZFC, as proved by
Sierpinski [118], for the consistency of the negation, and Laver [87] for the
consistency.
Borel Determinacy and Zermelo Set Theory. Consider the following twoplayer game. A subset A of the unit interval is named at the outset. Players
then take turns choosing xi and yi ∈ {0, 1}. Player I wins if the sequence
hx0, y0, x1, y1 . . .i, interpreted as an element of the unit interval, is in A. Player
II wins if the sequence is not in A. We say that the set A is determined if this
game is determined, meaning that one of the players has a winning strategy.
The Axiom of Determinacy (AD) states that every set of reals is determined.

