Paul Grice

must regard the exercise of rationality in the free adoption and pursuit of
ends as an unrelativized good at which all persons should aim. The second
stage examines the concepts of happiness and freedom to discover
principles which persons—conceived of as rationally adopting and
pursuing ends—must adopt insofar as they are to qualify as rational.
The first stage. Why think that one must regard the exercise of rationality
in the free adoption and pursuit of ends as an unrelativized good at which
all persons should aim? To begin with, what does Grice mean by an
“unrelativized good”? Grice grants that the concept of unrelativized value
requires defense; after all, things have value only relative to ends and
beneficiaries. So how is unrelativized value to be understood? Grice
defines unrelativized value “in Aristotelian style [as] whatever would
seem to possess such value in the eyes of a duly accredited judge; and a
duly accredited judge might be identifiable as a good person operating in
conditions of freedom.” (Of course, this is still to talk about what is of
value for and to persons; the point is to avoid relativization to this or that
kind of person or kind of end.) So, why would a duly accredited judge see
value in the free rational adoption and pursuit of ends, where such value is
not ascribed because of the contribution that activity makes to some other
end?
Grice’s views on commonsense psychology provide the answer. As noted
earlier, Grice thinks that commonsense psychology exhibits two features:
parts of it are self-justifying; and, it contains principles for evaluating
thought and action, where some of those principles are self-justifying.
When he turns to ethics, Grice adds that commonsense psychology
represents us as exercising rationality in freely adopting and pursuing
ends; moreover, this view of ourselves is self-justifying in the sense that
we cannot coherently conceive of ourselves in any other way. Grice’s—
very plausible—claim is that a “duly accredited judge” operating from
within the theory of commonsense psychology would take the rational,

28

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

