theory can appropriately constrain counterfactual assessment. Three main candidates immediately
suggest themselves: background science, background logic, and background metaphysics.
First, let’s consider whether science can adequately constrain the assessment of
interventionist counterfactuals. Here, we might take inspiration from certain causal interventionists.
For instance, in their manipulationist account of causation, Menzies and Price appeal to artificial
simulations to make sense of how we can justify causal claims about unmanipulable events. Take the
claim that some earthquake was caused by friction between continental plates. Menzies and Price
argue:
We can make such causal claims because we believe that there is another situation that
models the circumstances surrounding the earthquake in the essential respects and does
support a means-end relation between an appropriate pair of events. The paradigm example
of such a situation would be that created by seismologists in their artificial simulations of the
movement of continental plates. (1993, 197)
The simulation informs judgments about the relevant counterfactuals because it adequately models
the mechanics of earthquakes. When artificial simulations are founded on a rich body of data and
have a track record of predictive success, they can significantly aid counterfactual reasoning.
That’s fine for the physical possibilities, but matters get trickier when it comes to
counternomics. Woodward is cognizant of the epistemological worries that arise from his move
toward conceptual or logical possibility. He admits:
It is arguable that as we make the relevant notion of ‘possible intervention’ more and more
permissive, so that it includes contra-nomic possibilities and so on, we reach a point at which
this notion and the counterfactuals in which it figures become so unclear that we can no
longer use them to illuminate… causal claims. (2009, 256)
That’s because it is unclear what the proposed intervention would involve and how to determine
what would result from it (2009, 257). If so, then perhaps counternomics might be thought to take
us beyond the “natural range of application” of causal interventionism (2009, 256).
However, Woodward suggests that, at least in some cases, elements of well-confirmed
scientific theories constrain our judgment with regard to physical impossibilities. Recall the example
of the moon’s gravitational attraction and its effect on the tides. Woodward suggests:
Although it may be true that any actual physical process that changes the position of the
moon will also directly influence the tides, Newtonian theory and familiar rules about the
composition of forces tell us how to subtract out any direct influence from such a process
so that we can calculate just what the effect of, say, doubling of the moon’s orbit (and no
other changes) would be on the tides, even though it also may be true that there is no way of
actually realizing this effect alone. (2003, 131)
That is, the appropriate physical theory can help us to establish the right kind of modularity in our
model of the intervention and its consequences. Woodward continues:
Newtonian theory itself delivers a determinate answer to questions about what would
happen to the tides under an intervention that doubles the moon’s orbit, and this is enough
for counterfactual claims about what would happen under such interventions to be
legitimate and to allow us to assess their truth. (2003, 131)
19

