506

2

Viktor J. Vanberg

RATIONALITY PRINCIPLE AND RATIONALITY HYPOTHESES IN
ECONOMICS

What I have referred to above as the most general form of rational choice theory
may be called the rationality principle [Vanberg, 2004a]. It essentially claims
that individuals act in ways that are consistent with their beliefs about how the
world works and their preferences over the states of the world that they expect
to result from the different courses of action available to them. What courses of
action individuals perceive as available options, what they believe to result from
these options, and which outcome they prefer over all others, are all subjective
matters, present in a person’s mind and not observable from the outside. In the
absence of independent evidence an observer who infers a person’s beliefs and
preferences from her behavior can ‘explain’ every conceivable action, including the
most absurd, by hypothesizing beliefs and preferences that are consistent with the
action. To the extent that action-independent evidence of a person’s beliefs and
preference is available such ‘explanations’ may be refutable. Yet, the refutation
concerns only the specific assumptions made about the content of a person’s beliefs
and preferences in the particular instance. The rationality principle itself, i.e.
the general claim that people act in subjectively consistent ways, remains totally
unaffected by such refutation.
If one wants to turn the rationality principle itself into a refutable conjecture,
into an empirically refutable rationality hypothesis [Vanberg, 2004a], one has to
place general bounds on the assumptions about people’s beliefs and preferences
that are admitted in explanations. In other words, one has to rule out — if not
the existence at least the explanatory relevance of — certain kinds of beliefs and
preferences. Neoclassical economics has responded to this challenge by modeling
humans as maximizers of their utility function,2 where the latter reflects their
preferences and the ‘maximizing’ is meant to imply that they act on adequate
theories about what are efficient ways to accomplish their goals. While there may
still be room for interpretation what ‘adequate beliefs’ is exactly meant to entail
and how utility functions are to be specified, a standard assumption in neoclassical
theorizing has been that economic agents act on perfect knowledge of the relevant
aspects of their environment, and that their utility function is essentially about
the (material) payoffs that they expect from their actions for themselves.
It is this model of perfectly rational and self-interested behavior3 that has long
2 The founding father of the neoclassical paradigm, Léon Walras, noted: “In our theory each
trader may be assumed to determine his own utility or want function as he pleases. Once these
curves have been determined, we show how prices result from them under a hypothetical régime of
absolutely free competition” [Walras, 1954, p. 256]. Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen [1971, p. 343]
points out that Walras’ s successor on the Lausanne chair, Vilfredo Pareto, “overtly claimed,
(that) once we have determined the means at the disposal of the individual and obtained ‘a
photograph’ of his tastes . . . the individual may disappear.”
3 The term ‘self-interested behavior’ is more appropriate in this context than the often used
term ‘selfish behavior’ because the attribute ‘selfish’ carries with it certain (negative) connotations that bias the issue. It implies assumptions about the ways in which persons go about
seeking to ‘maximize their utility’ that need not be entailed at all in a theory that supposes

