1334

T. P. Davis

where 0 < a < 1, b is a positive odd integer, and ab > 1 þ 3π
2 (Weierstrass 1872).
Prior to the introduction of this function, it was believed, almost axiomatically, that if
a function was continuous, it could only be nondifferentiable at a ﬁnite set of points,
perhaps because there was a “proof” in one of André-Marie Ampère’s papers –
although this point is debated by some. These everywhere continuous but nowhere
differentiable functions were met with disdain from the mathematical community,
with Poincaré calling these functions “monsters” and Charles Hermite “a lamentable
scourge.” In fact, some mathematical proofs were upended as a result of the
existence of such functions, and this leads to the careful treatment of all concepts
and the birth of modern analysis (Gray 2015).
However, there are processes in both physics and ﬁnance that could be described
by precisely such a function. In 1827, botanist Robert Brown observed both organic
and inorganic particles under a microscope undergoing “jittery” motion, now named
Brownian motion in his honor. The explanation for this behavior was not explained
until 1905 when Albert Einstein wrote a paper attributing the phenomenon to the
atomic theory of matter (Einstein et al. 1905) which was surprisingly still not
generally accepted at the time. Bachelier realized that stock prices can be described
by such processes.
A Brownian motion is a continuous function of time W(t) (denoted W since it is
known as a Weiner process (Wiener 1923)) starting at 0. The process up to time T is
built up by realizations of normal random draws
W ðT Þ ¼

N

½W ðtiþ1 Þ  W ðti Þ

ð6Þ

i¼0

where the increments are independent and identically distributed according to the
normal distribution with mean 0 and variance Δt
W ðt þ ΔtÞ  W ðtÞ  N ð0, ΔtÞ:

ð7Þ

These processes are martingales which means their expectation in the future is
equal to the value today. This was embedded in Bachelier’s thesis as the “Principle of
Mathematical Expectation”:
The mathematical expectation of a speculator is nil. The generality of this principle needs to
be appreciated: it signiﬁes that the market, at a given instant, considers as having nil
expectation not only the current trading operations, but also those that would be based on
a subsequent movement of prices. The mathematical expectation of an operation that may be
either positive or negative, if it produces a price movement, is a priori nil.

Mathematically this is shown by taking expectations
E½W ðtÞjF s  ¼ E½W ðtÞ  W ðsÞjF s  þ E½W ðsÞjF s 

ð8Þ

