292 Anandi Hattiangadi

Intuitively, EXP entails that from a contradiction, anything
follows. Yet, if we understand disbelieving Q to be equivalent
to believing ∼Q, (Wo–EXP) entails that one way to satisfy (Wo–
EXP) is to believe P, believe ∼P, and not believe ∼Q, though ∼Q
is just as much a consequence of P ∧ ∼P as Q.
3.3 Distributed
Perhaps distributed norms do better with respect to EXP. For
instance, consider (Do+) applied to EXP:
(Do+EXP) (P ∧ ∼P ⊨ Q) → If S ought to believe P, and S ought to
believe ∼P, then S ought to believe Q.

On the face of it, (Do+EXP) seems more plausible than the previous principles, since it entails that you ought to believe Q
only if you ought to believe both P and ∼P. And it might be
argued that there are never circumstances in which you ought
to both believe P and believe ∼P. As a consequence, acceptance of this normative principle will never commit you to
accepting that you ought to believe anything whatsoever.
However, the assumption that there are never circumstances in which you ought to have contradictory beliefs is
questionable. An obvious way to put pressure on it is by appeal to the Preface Paradox (cf. Steinberger 2016). Suppose
that Sita has written a book about birds. She has researched it
very carefully, and has good evidence for each of the statements that she makes in the book. Let P be the conjunction of
these statements. On evidential grounds, it seems that Sita
ought to believe P. Yet, Sita is also rightly aware of her own
fallibility. Since it is a very long book, she has excellent reason
to think that at least one of the statements in it is false. Indeed, if she has very good evidence of her own fallibility, Sita
arguably ought to think this; she ought to think that ∼P. In
such a context, acceptance of (Do+EXP) entails that Sita ought
to believe everything.
It might be objected that this is not the correct account of
the Preface Paradox. Perhaps it will be argued that though
Sita ought to believe each of the statements in the book, she
ought not to believe their conjunction. This is certainly one
prominent response to the paradox (cf. Kyburg 1961). However, the question we are considering here does not concern

