180

180

■

Scientific Explanations by Constraint

Broadly logical truths among the
subnomic truths
The laws of statics, including the
parallelogram of forces
The above along with the fundamental
dynamical law, the law of the composition of
forces, and conservation laws, among others
—but not the force laws
All of the laws among the sub-nomic truths
(Λ)

All subnomic truths?

Figure 4.9 Some (though perhaps not all) plausibly subnomically stable sets (for
simplicity, only sets arising in this chapter are included)

In elaborating what it would be for the statical laws to be independent of the
dynamical laws, I have appealed to precisely the sort of counterlegals that (I
have shown) advocates of the statical explanation frequently invoke. As a further example, consider the French mathematician and physicist Louis Poinsot,
who offered a statical explanation of the parallelogram law that (like Duchayla’s)
appeals to the principle of the transmissibility of force. He maintained that the
laws of statics would still have held even if Newton’s second law had not held: “in
Statics properly so called it is not necessary to know the actual effect of forces
upon matter … to ascertain, for instance, if a double force produces upon the
same body a double velocity, or if the same force applied to a body of double
the mass produces but half the velocity, &c. [In statics,] whatever the action of
forces upon bodies may be, be they [the forces] proportional or not to their sensible effects, still the truths which we are about to expound will remain no less
the same” (1847, 2–​3). The parallelogram law’s invariance under certain counterlegal antecedents is not only the fundamental point in dispute between advocates of the dynamical and statical explanations, but also the main point over
which defenders of Duchayla’s and Poisson’s explanations disagree. Advocates
of Poisson’s account hold that contrary to Duchayla’s account, the parallelogram
law would still have held even if the principle of the transmissibility of force had
not been true. (Earlier I gave Earnshaw’s appeal to this subjunctive fact.)
The symmetry metalaw that Poisson’s explanation invokes (that the first-​
order laws are collectively invariant under rotation) is identical to one of the
constraints (“spatial isotropy”) in the non-​causal explanation of the coordinate transformations, which I presented in ­chapter 3. It is also identical to one
of the constraints in the non-​causal explanation of the conservation of angular

