BAYESIAN METHODS

features of Bayesian confirmation theory, which seem to indicate that
the function of general theories in science is not what it is assumed to
be in the deductivist model and that theoretical inference, like Mill's
eductive inference or instance confirmation in Carnap's theory, can better be regarded as going from case to case than by way of general theories
and their entailments.
It is convenient to begin the examination of confirmation relations in
scientific theories by a discussion of conditions of adequacy given by
Hempel which have been shown to give rise to paradoxes. We have
already seen that the equivalence, entailment, and converse entailment
conditions are intuitive criteria of adequacy for scientific inference and
that they are all satisfied by Bayesian theory under certain conditions of
nonzero probabilities. These are three of the conditions discussed by
Hempel in his pioneering "Studies in the Logic of Confirmation,"22 in
which they are initially presented, along with other suggested conditions,
independently of whether confirmation should be explicated by a probabilistic or any other type of axiomatic system. Hempel's paper gave rise
to the well-known "paradoxes of the raven," which will be discussed in
the next section, but some of the other conditions of adequacy give rise
to another paradox, which I shall discriminate as the "transitivity paradox." My terminology and notation will here be a little different from
Hempel's.
Consider first the general question of how far the confirmation relation can be expected to be transitive, that is, should it satisfy the condition "If f confirms h, and h confirms g, then f confirms g"? In this
general form transitivity is obviously not satisfied by the usual notions of
confirmation or support. For example, the foundations of a house support
the walls which support the roof, and it is true that the foundations sup
port the roof, but although the pivot supports the seesaw, and the seesaw
the child at one end, it is not in general true that the pivot supports the
child. Again, if a man has disappeared, to find him shot dead confirms
the hypothesis that he has been murdered, and that he has been murdered in itself confirms that there is a strangler at large, but that he has
been shot does not confirm that there is a strangler.
22
C. G. Hempel, "Studies in the Logic of Confirmation," Mind, 54 (1945), 1
and 97, reprinted with a new postscript in Aspects of Scientific Explanation (New
York: Free Press, 1965), p. 3. See also B. Skyrms, "Nomological Necessity and the
Paradoxes of Confirmation," Philosophy of Science, 33 (1966), 230.

87

