Mary Hesse
adapt to the future. And the learner has the predictor's problem of
choice of initial probabilities, renewed on each occasion upon which he
receives new evidence.
To conclude this brief survey, the best that can be said for a decisiontheoretic formulation of confirmation theory is that it provides a sufficient framework in terms of which any choice-problem and subsequent
decision could be represented, though possibly at the cost of highly
implausible assumptions about utilities, initial probabilities, and posterior
transformations. But clearly in itself this representation is vacuous as a
method of induction; for unless there are some restrictions upon the
initial distribution and some grounds for using a Bayes or some other
posterior transformation rule on that distribution, the effect of evidence
on the posterior distribution is quite arbitrary. Even if the overall probability distribution is required to be coherent or strictly coherent, that
is, so long as it satisfies the probability axioms, a long run of black crows,
for example, might be represented as good evidence for the statistical
generalization "Most crows are white," if only the probability of this
generalization was initially high enough or if Bayes's theorem is held to
be irrelevant to the posterior transformation of probabilities. Rational
decision procedures are not sufficient to capture any interesting inductive sense of rationality, for which further constraints must be found.
III. Non-Bayesian Transformations
The possibilities of assignment of initial probabilities and posterior
transformations have been left wide open by the arguments of the previous section. The weakest possible response to this situation, which might
be called pure personalism, is the view that the succession of probability
distributions over hypotheses held by a believer is a purely physical or
causal matter of belief-response to stimuli deriving from the evidence.
If no normative constraints are put upon belief distributions other than
coherence, this is equivalent to adopting an inductively arbitrary, and
arbitrarily changing, initial probability distribution as a result of each
new piece of evidence, and cannot in itself yield inductively or predictively useful beliefs except by accident. No serious inductive logician
could be a pure personalist in just this sense, and in fact those who have
emphasized the ultimately physical nature of the effect of evidence on
66

