9.3. China is a big country, and it has bamboos in it. This is
reflected in their methods for measuring the heavens. As
Chen Zi says, “16,000 li to the south at the summer solstice, and 135,000 li to the south at the winter solstice, if
one sets up a post at noon it casts no shadow. This single
[fact is the basis of] the numbers of the Way of Heaven.”
(From The book of Chen Zi, in the Mathematical Classics
of the Zhou Gnomon, compiled around the first century
BCE.)

(a) Draw a picture of this and use it to find a formula
for the radius of the earth in terms of measurable
quantities.
Al-Biruni did indeed carry this out:
“When I happened to be living in the fort of Nandana
in the land of India, I observed from an adjacent high
mountain standing west from the fort, a large plain lying south of the mountain. It occurred to me that I
should examine this method there. So, from the top of
the mountain, I made an empirical measurement of the
contact between the earth and the blue sky. I found that
the line of sight had dropped below the reference line
by the amount 0;34◦ . Then I measured the perpendicular of the mountain and found it to be 652;3,18 cubits,
where the cubit is a standard of length used in that region for measuring cloth.” Al-Biruni goes on to calculate
the radius of the earth from this data, which comes out
as 12,803,337;2,9 cubits.

Chen Zi is referring to the point S’ on the earth’s surface perpendicularly beneath the sun S. Now, standing
somewhere else, we erect a bamboo tube BB’ so that its
shadow falls at our feet O.
(a) Draw a picture of this and use it to find a formula for
the distance to the sun from the earth, SS’, in terms
of measurable quantities. (Assume that the earth is
flat.)
Now, Chen Zi continues, pick up the bamboo tube you
used as the post and point it towards the sun. Suppose its
diameter is just big enough for you to see the whole sun
through the tube (otherwise go get a longer or shorter
tube).

These numbers are given in a mixed notation. The integer part (before the semicolon) is given in ordinary decimal notation, while the fractional part (after the semicolon) is given in sexagesimal (base 60) form. Thus, for
example, 12, 803, 337; 2, 9 = 12803337; 2, 9 = 12803337 +
9
2
60 + 602 .

(b) Draw a picture of this and use it to find a formula
for the diameter of the sun in terms of measurable
and known quantities.

(b) Check al-Biruni’s calculation. Note that some discrepancy results from imperfections in the trigonometric tables available to him.

(c) The value for SS’ reported by Chen Zi is 80,000 li.
Does this seem accurate? (Rather than trying to
look up how long a li is you can answer this on the
basis of the information in the quotation above.)

“Cubit” means “forearm,” which makes sense as a unit
for “measuring cloth.” Although the exact value of a cubit intended by an author is often unclear, one may generally assume it to be about 44 cm.

9.4. While the Chinese thus utilised their benefit of having
vast land and bamboo sticks at their disposal, the Muslims faced other circumstances in response to which
they devised other methods. Al-Biruni (Book of the Determination of Coordinates of Localities, c. 1025, chapter
5) discusses a method for measuring the circumference
of the earth akin to that of Eratostenes, but does not find
it feasible:

(c) In terms of metric units, with what accuracy does
al-Biruni specify the height of the mountain?
The downside of this method is of course that it requires
“a high mountain close to the seashore, or close to a large
level desert.” Thus, coming across such a mountain is an
opportunity too good to pass up even if you are in the
middle of a war:

“Who is prepared to help me in this [project]? It requires strong command over a vast tract of land and extreme caution is needed from the dangerous treacheries
of those spread over it. I once chose for this project
the localities between Dahistan, in the vicinity of Jurjan
and the land of the Chuzz (Turks), but the findings were
not encouraging, and then the patrons who financed the
project lost interest in it.”

“Abu al-Tayyib Sanad bin ’Ali has narrated that he was in
the company of al-Ma’mun when he made his campaign
against the Byzantines, and that on his way he passed by
a high mountain close to the sea. Then al-Ma’mun summoned him to his presence and ordered him to climb
that mountain, and to measure at its summit the dip of
the sun.”

Instead: “Here is another method for the determination
of the circumference of the earth. It does not require
walking in deserts.”

(d) However, a mountain next to a vast, completely
flat land is better than a mountain next to the sea.
Why? (Hint: how do you determine the height of
the mountain?)

The method is this. Climb a mountain. Let M be the
mountain top, E its base, and C the centre of the earth.
Now look towards the horizon and let H be the point furthest away from you that you can see.

(e) Argue on the basis of figure 14 that geographical
circumstances were ideal for al-Biruni’s measurements.
13

