Figure 17: Kepler’s theory of planetary distances.
14.5. Explain why the sun-centred model of Copernicus was
crucial in two ways for Kepler to be able to posit this theory.
You might think that the “p-value” of Kepler’s theory does not
pass a significance test since there are so many possible permutations of the polyhedra—shouldn’t one of them fit just by
chance? Kepler had some dubious arguments for his particular
ordering, a sample of which you will find in the readings. But
even if you are not impressed by these arguments, Kepler’s theory is not as arbitrary as you might think, because many permutations do not change the sizes. For example:

As Copernicus puts it, the heliocentric system “binds together
so closely the order and the magnitudes of all the planets and of
their spheres or orbital circles and the heavens themselves that
nothing can be shifted around in any part of them without disrupting the remaining parts and the universe as a whole.” For
this reason he can claim triumphantly that earlier astronomers
“have not been able to discover or to infer the chief point of all,
i.e., the form of the world and the certain commensurability of
its parts. But they are in exactly the same fix as someone taking
from different places hands, feet, head, and the other limbs—
shaped very beautifully but not with reference to one body and
without correspondence to one another—so that such parts
made up a monster rather than a man.”

14.6. Show that the cube and the octahedron are interchangeable (i.e., have the same ratio of circumradius to inradius).

§ 15.

Galileo

Galileo was a prominent advocate of Copernicus’s heliocentric
system; this even got him into hot water with the church authorities, as we learn more about in the readings. Galileo presented his case in Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World
Systems (1632). At the end of the work one reads:

The Copernican system conflicts with the ancient vision of the
cosmos and the polyhedral theory of the elements in a number
of ways.

In the conversations of these four days we have,
then, strong evidences in favor of the Copernican
system, among which three have been shown to be
very convincing—those taken from the stoppings
and retrograde motions of the planets, and their
approaches toward and recessions from the earth;
second, from the revolution of the sun upon itself,
and from what is to be observed in the sunspots;
and third, from the ebbing and flowing of the
ocean tides.

14.4. Outline how.
But Kepler, as we saw in §2, was fascinated by the mathematical beauty of those theories and was not about to give them
up so easily. In his Mysterium Cosmographicum (1596), gave
a very imaginative interpretation of the Copernican universe
in terms of the regular polyhedra, using them to explain “the
nature of the universe, God’s plan for creating it, God’s source
for the numbers, the reason why there are six orbits, and the
spaces which fall between all the spheres.” See figure 17. The
spheres of the planets are nested in such a way that the regular
polyhedra fit precisely between them. Kepler’s theory fits the
facts remarkably well, and is a striking unification of the two
special numbers from §2.

The first argument is that of problem 14.1. The third argument
is that the tides can only be due to the earth’s motion:
There is nothing we can do to replicate artificially
the motions of the tides, apart from moving the
vessel containing the water. Surely this is enough
to convince anyone that any other cause that is put
20

