R2.3. Name the words for 9 and “new” in each language you
know.

cases.” (60)
“Another argument in favour of [this interpretation] is given by
the form of the number words for 8 in Latin and Greek. In Latin
the word is octo, in Greek oktô; the ending -ô in Greek is a dual
ending. In the Gothic and Sanskrit words for 8, ahtaú and astau, the ending -au is also a dual ending. So it seems that 8
was originally conceived as a dual, i.e. as two fours . . . In many
primitive languages, the number word for 8 is formed as ‘twice
4’. So it is quite possible that in the mother language of the
Indo-European family the independent number words originally ended at 4 and that 8 was expressed as twice 4.” (60)

G RAHAM F LEGG, Numbers Through the Ages, Sheridan
House, 1989.

“There is evidence of tallying (carving notches on bone or
wood) going back more than thirty thousand years” (37)—the
oldest signs of mathematical activity in the historical record.
Tallying remained a widespread record of transactions well into
modern times, as witnessed for instance in Shakespeare (48):
“There shall be no money, all shall eat and drink on my score.”
(Henry VI) “He parted well and paid his score.” (Macbeth)

“It is also possible that at one time counting stopped at 8. This
would occur naturally when two handsbreadths had been used
up in measurement. After the doubling of ‘four’ to give ‘eight’,
there would be a need for a ‘new’ number [or hand] before
counting could continue. It is a striking fact that there is a similarity in most Indo-European languages between the word for
9 and the word for ‘new’.” (60)

“Tally sticks were admitted as legal documents even as late as
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.” (43) For instance,
“Napoleon’s book of civil law . . . of 1804” states: “The tally sticks
which match their stocks have the force of contracts between
persons who are accustomed to declare in this manner the deliveries they have made or received.” (44)

E DWARD S APIR, Notes on the Takelma Indians of Southwestern Oregon, American Anthropologist, New Series,
9(2), 1907, 251-275.

“The word for ‘contract’ in Chinese is written by means of two
characters at the top, one for a notched stick and one for a
knife, and another at the bottom which means ‘large’. Thus a
contract in Chinese is symbolised as ‘a large tally stick’.” (44)



Number words of “the Takelma numeral system” have these literal meanings: “Four is evidently nothing but ‘two two’; . . . six,
seven, eight, and nine are respectively equivalent to ‘one finger
in,’ ‘two fingers in,’ ‘three fingers in,’ and ‘four fingers in’ . . .; ten
is ‘two hands’ . . . twenty is quite transparently ‘one person’ . . .,
i.e., ‘two hands and two feet’.” (266)

As for verbal representation of numbers, “Over most of aboriginal Australia one finds essentially only two number words,
‘one’ and ‘two’: many of the tribes are reported definitively as
not counting beyond 2, and as indicating higher multiplicities
by the word ‘many’, while others go a little further by compounding these words—for example, expressing 3 as ‘two-one’,
4 as ‘two-two’ . . . A similar method of counting, the so-called
2-system, is found in New Guinea, in South America, and in
South Africa.” (7, quoting Seidenberg)

§ R3.

Beginnings of geometry

R3.1. Herodotus, Strabo, and Proclus give subtly different accounts of the origins of geometry in Egypt. Based on this
information alone, are there grounds for judging their
relative credibility?

“At a very early stage of counting, the ‘number’ of something
that was counted was felt to be one of its attributes.” (57)
Therefore, “In Gothic as well as High and Middle German the
number words for 2 and 3 do appear as adjectives; they have
separate masculine, feminine and neuter forms, and they are
inflected like adjectives. The same is true for Latin and Greek.”
(58)

H ERODOTUS, The Histories, c. -440, translation by
A. D. Godley.

“This king [Sesostris] also (they said) divided the country
among all the Egyptians by giving each an equal parcel of land,
and made this his source of revenue, assessing the payment
of a yearly tax. And any man who was robbed by the river of
part of his land could come to Sesostris and declare what had
happened; then the king would send men to look into it and
calculate the part by which the land was diminished, so that
thereafter it should pay in proportion to the tax originally imposed. From this, in my opinion, the Greeks learned the art of
measuring land.” (2.109)

However, “In all known Indo-European languages, numbers
beyond 4 are not treated as adjectives.” (59) “It is quite possible that in the original Indo-European language ‘one’, ‘two’,
‘three’, and ‘four’ were earlier number words, which were more
closely connected with the counted objects and treated like adjectives, whereas ‘five’, ‘six’, etc. were later number words, perhaps taken over from a foreign language, which were no longer
considered as adjectives and hence remained unchanged in all
3

