§ 1.

Mechanics in antiquity and middle ages

§ 1.1. Discussion questions
1.1. Aristotle’s view of physics involves what we would consider “scientific” claims:
• Elements have a natural place; this is a driver of motion.
• Motion is fundamentally distinct from rest (contrary to modern inertia).
• A void is impossible.
• The universe is finite (bounded by the sphere of the stars).
As well as “metaphysical” claims:
• Motion is merely one instance of the more general concept of change.
• Position is a quality of a body (comparable to colour, heat, wetness, etc.).
• Qualities are superimposed on matter (not reducible to material explication in the manner of atomism).
Argue that these sets of beliefs are extensively interdependent and mutually supportive.
1.2. Buridan’s impetus theory is purely qualitative in character. Why is it interesting to study such things quantitatively? Why
are modern physics textbooks obsessed with plugging numbers into formulas instead of reasoning verbally and philosophically like Buridan?
Unification of terrestrial and celestial domains. Even Galileo didn’t have a good selling point.

1.3. Buridan’s impetus theory anticipates the modern notions of inertia and momentum. Discuss.
Yes, qualitatively. 102.

1.4. Medieval physics was focussed on explaining why a rock, once thrown, keeps going after it no longer has contact with the
thrower. Modern physics fundamentally change the question: the thing to be explained is not why the rock keeps going
but why it eventually stops. Discuss.
In support of this: 100.1, 103.7. Focus on mathematics helps this conceptual transition.

1.5. Is there an unresolved ambiguity as to whether impetus is circular or rectilinear in Buridan’s account? Compare for example the circular motion of the planets with a rock in a sling (and what happens when it is released).
Planets discussed at 103.6. Problem can be resolved by positing crystalline spheres (similar to Buridan’s mill stone example).

§ 1.2. Reader
A NDREW E DE & L ESLEY C ORMACK, A History of Science in Society: A Reader, Broadview Press, 2007.

3.4. Buridan.
T HOMAS K UHN, What Are Scientific Revolutions?, in Lorenz Kruger, Lorraine J. Daston, and Michael Heidelberger (eds.), The
Probabilistic Revolution, volume I: Ideas in History, MIT Press, 1987, 7–22.

[When] I first read some of Aristotle’s physical writings . . . , I rapidly discovered that Aristotle had known almost no mechanics
at all. . . . As I was reading him, Aristotle appeared not only ignorant of mechanics, but a dreadfully bad physical scientist as
well. About motion, in particular, his writings seemed to me full of egregious errors, both of logic and of observation. These
conclusions were unlikely. Aristotle, after all, had been the much admired codifier of ancient logic. . . . In addition, Aristotle had
often proved an extraordinarily acute naturalistic observer . . . in biology, especially. . . . How could his characteristic talents have
deserted him so systematically when he turned to the study of motion and mechanics? Equally, if his talents had so deserted
him, why had his writings in physics been taken so seriously for so many centuries after his death? Those questions troubled
me. I could easily believe that Aristotle had stumbled, but not that, on entering physics, he had totally collapsed. Might not the
fault be mine rather than Aristotle’s, I asked myself. . . .
2

