The rationale for individual astrology seems to have included
the following. The idea that the souls of the dead rise to the
heavens is an old one. Not the first example is that “the inscription for the fallen at the battle of Potidea (-431) says: ‘The
aether will receive their souls, as the earth receives their bodies’” (146) From here it is a rather short step to the idea that,
as expressed for example “in Servius’ commentary on Aeneid
VI 714, the souls before birth go down through the planetary spheres, acquiring thereby from Saturn inertia, from Mars
wrath, from Venus lust, from Mercury avarice, from Jupiter ambition” (144) Another argument in support of this view is that
the heavens are the paradigm of self-motion, which is not displayed by soulless objects. As Plato puts it: “the soul which
has lost its wings is borne along until it gets hold of something
solid, . . . taking upon itself an earthly body, which seems to be
selfmoving, because of the power of the soul within it.” (147,
Phaedrus 246b-c)

C ARL S AGAN, Cosmos, TV show, PBS, 1980.

“Our language preserves an astrological consciousness . . . The
word ‘disaster’ comes from the Greek for ‘bad star’. The Italians
once believed that disease was caused by the influence of the
stars. It’s the origin of our word ‘influenza’. . . .
Astrology developed into a strange discipline, a mixture of
careful observations, mathematics and record keeping with
fuzzy thinking and pious fraud. Nevertheless, astrology survived and flourished. Why? Because it seems to lend a cosmic
significance to the routine of our daily lives. It pretends to satisfy our longing to feel personally connected to the universe.
Astrology suggests a dangerous fatalism. If our lives are controlled by a set of traffic signals in the sky, why try to change
anything? . . .
Astrology can be tested by the lives of twins. There are many
real cases like this: One twin is killed in childhood in, say, a riding accident, or is struck by lightning but the other lives to a
prosperous old age. Suppose that happened to me. My twin
and I would be born in precisely the same place and within
minutes of each other. Exactly the same planets would be rising at our births. If astrology were valid how could we have
such profoundly different fates? . . .

V ETTIUS VALENS, Anthologies, c. 150. Quoted from Roger
Beck, A Brief History of Ancient Astrology, Blackwell, 2007,
74–76.

“The Sun is the overseer of all; he is fiery, he is the light of the
intellect and the instrument of the soul’s perception. In a horoscope he indicates kingship, leadership, . . . the father, the master . . .

Also, how could it possibly work? How could the rising of Mars
at the moment of my birth affect me then or now? I was born
in a closed room. Light from Mars couldn’t get in. The only
influence of Mars which could affect me was its gravity. But
the gravitational influence of the obstetrician was much larger
than the gravitational influence of Mars. Mars is a lot more
massive but the obstetrician was a lot closer.”

The Moon . . . indicates human life at birth, the body, the
mother . . ., nurture . . . housekeeping, the queen, the mistress
...
Saturn makes those born under him . . . solitary, . . . robed in
black, importunate, miserable . . . He causes . . . laziness, inactivity, hindrances, long drawn out litigation, reversals, secrets,
oppression, fetters, griefs, accusations, tears, loss of parents,
captivity, banishment. He makes . . . tax collectors . . . He brings
things to completion . . . He makes people single or widowed,
orphaned or childless.

AUGUSTINE, The Confessions, c. 400. Translated by Henry
Chadwick, Oxford University Press, 1991.

“I now wished to attack and with ridicule to refute . . . one of
those charlatans who make money out of astrology. . . . I therefore gave attention to those who are born twins. Most of them
emerge from the womb in succession at a brief interval of time.
They may contend that in the realm of nature this interval has
considerable consequences. But it cannot be recorded by human observation and noted in the tables that the astrologer will
inspect to give a true forecast. . . . Someone inspecting the identical tables ought to have been able to say that Esau and Jacob
would have the same destiny. Yet things turned out differently
in each case.” (VII.vi.10)

Jupiter indicates . . . abundance, salaries, large gifts, good crop
yields, justice, rulership, . . . release from chains, freedom . . .
Mars indicates violence, wars, plundering, uproar, excess,
adultery . . .; masculinity, perjury, error, negotiations on bad
terms; those who work with fire or iron, artisans, masons. He
makes military commanders . . .
Venus is desire and erotic love. She indicates the mother and
the nurturer. She causes . . . reconciliations for good ends,
marriages, refined arts and crafts, good singing voices, music,
sweetness of melody, beauty of form, painting . . .

§ R2.

Mercury indicates education, letters, argumentation, logic,
brotherhood, . . . calculations, geometry, commerce, youth,
play, theft, . . . discoveries . . . He is the giver of discernment and
judgment. He is in charge of brothers, younger children, . . .”
(I.1)

Early numeration

R2.1. What general theses can be supported by evidence from
both this section and §R4?
R2.2. Why is it interesting that some number words used to be
conjugated like adjectives?
2

