;

INTRODUCTORY

22
It

would appear therefore

that, notwithstanding

the in-

fluence of Plato, the attitude of cultivated people in general

towards mathematics was not different in Plato's time from

what it is to-day.

We are told that it was one of the early Pythagoreans,
unnamed, who first taught geometry for money
One of the
Pythagoreans lost his property, and when this misfortune
befell him he was allowed to make money by teaching
:

geometry.' 1

'

We may fairly conclude that Hippocrates of

Chios, the first writer of Elements, who also

famous by his quadrature of

lunes, his

made himself

reduction of

duplication of the cube to the problem of finding

the

two mean

proportionals, and his proof that the areas of circles are in

the ratio of the squares on their diameters, also taught for

money and for a like reason.

One version of the story is that

he was a merchant, but lost all his property through being
captured by a pirate vessel.
He then came to Athens to
prosecute the offenders and, during a long stay, attended
lectures, finally attaining such proficiency in geometry that
he tried to square the circle. 2 Aristotle has the different
version that he allowed himself to be defrauded of a large
sum by custom-house officers at Byzantium, thereby proving,
in Aristotle's opinion, that, though a good geometer, he was
stupid and incompetent in the business of ordinary life. 3
We find in the Platonic dialogues one or two glimpses of
mathematics being taught or discussed in school- or classrooms. In the Erastae 4 Socrates is represented as going into
the school of Dionysius (Plato's own schoolmaster 5 ) and find-

ing two lads earnestly arguing some point of astronomy
whether it was Anaxagoras or Oenopides whose theories they

were discussing he could not catch, but they were drawing
circles and imitating some inclination or other with their
hands. In Plato's Theaetetus 6 we have the story of Theodoras
lecturing on surds and proving separately, for the square root
of every non-square number from 3 to 17, that it is incommensurable with 1, a procedure which set Theaetetus and the
1

Iamblichus, Vit. Pyth. 89.

2

Philoponus on Arist. Phys., p. 327 l> 44-8, Brandis.

3

Eudemian Ethics, H. 14, 1247 a 17.

4

Erastae, 32 a, b.
6
Theaetetus, 147 D-148 B.

5

Diog. L. iii. 5.

