Evolutionary Resilience to Climate Change

•

247

efforts for climate change and those for habitat restoration are intrinsically linked: Conserving and restoring the structural features of the
habitat, particularly vegetation complexity, will enhance behavioral resilience to climate change.
Often, however, behavioral changes are not enough to buffer the effects of environmental warming. For instance, the three-lined skink
(Bassiana duperreyi) of Australia has adjusted to rising temperatures by
digging deeper burrows. This species has also shifted its phenology by
breeding several weeks earlier. Nonetheless, the combination of behavioral compensation and advanced breeding phenology has not been
enough to fully accommodate environmental change; B. duperreyi exhibits temperature-dependent sex determination, and incubation temperatures are now high enough in this species that most offspring are
likely to be female.
Higher environmental temperatures also appear to be leading to a
greater frequency of females in the bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps) of
Australia. In this lizard, sex is determined both genetically (i.e., via
chromosomes) and environmentally; females result from higher incubation temperatures. In recent years, however, scientists have been detecting high numbers of females with male chromosomes, indicating
that high incubation temperatures have shifted control of sex determination from genetics to the environment. Because females with male
chromosomes can successfully mate with male lizards, climate change
could lead to the loss of the female-specific chromosome (i.e., the W
chromosome).
Even when behavioral shifts can occur, it is likely that they incur potential fitness costs. For example, North American elk (Cervus elaphus)
from montane deserts consistently foraged in areas where they could
avoid thermal stress, although those environments had poorer-quality
food. Similarly, to avoid being active during the hottest times of day,
some animals forage more at night. In turn, this behavior may increase
their exposure to nocturnal predators or parasites. When organisms retreat to burrows during the hottest times of the day, they miss out on
opportunities for foraging and reproduction. As these costs mount,
populations will be increasingly unlikely to maintain positive growth
and will be at a greater risk of extinction.

