Perception as as a source of knowledge > Indirect realism

The answer, surely, is nothing! From the perceiver’s perspective, it doesn’t make any
difference if there is an external object causing the sense data or not - their perception
will be exactly the same in both cases.
This presents a problem for indirect realism: Indirect realism says that perception works
like situation 1: the tree causes sense data that represents the tree. But if we only
perceive the sense data, how could we know there really is a mind-independent tree
causing this sense data? Reality could be like situation 2 and there would be absolutely
no difference from the perspective of the perceiver. If we only perceive sense data and
not the object itself, then there is no way of telling if the sense data is an accurate
representation of the external world - or even that there is an external world at all! There
exists a veil of perception between the object and the sense data that we cannot get past.
The argument, then, is this: indirect realism claims that there is a mind-independent
external world, but cannot possibly provide any evidence for this claim because all we
ever perceive is sense data.

Indirect realist responses to the sceptical problem
Several indirect realist philosophers have responded to the problem of the veil of
perception above. The syllabus lists three responses to the veil of perception (and we
also cover these responses in the scepticism discussion starting from page 73).

Russell: External world is the best hypothesis
Bertrand Russell concedes that there is no way we can conclusively get past the veil of
perception and prove the existence of the mind-independent external world. However,
Russell argues that the existence of a mind-independent external world is the best
hypothesis (best explanation) for our perceptions.
Russell’s argument is as follows:

e

Either:
o
©

A: Mind-independent objects exist and cause my sense data
B: Mind-independent objects do not exist and do not cause my sense data

e

|can’t prove
A or B definitively

e

So,| have to treat A and B as hypotheses

¢

Aisa better explanation of my experience than B
So, mind independent objects exist and cause my sense data

e

Russell uses an example of a cat to explain why he thinks hypothesis A is a better
on a sofa
explanation for his perceptions than hypothesis B. Suppose | see a cat sitting
and then later | see it sitting on the floor, the two explanations are:

47

