HOW TO GET AN A IN A-LEVEL PHILOSOPHY > How to get an A/A* in the exam
What do eliminative materialists claim about mental states? (3 marks)
Eliminative materialists claim that some or all mental states that are supposed to
exist according to folk-psychology, such as beliefs and intentions, do not exist and
should be eliminated from a scientific description of the world.

What is philosophical scepticism? (3 marks)
Philosophical scepticism is used as an approach to test the strength of our
knowledge claims and to understand the nature of knowledge and justification
more clearly. The brain in a vat thought experiment is an example of
philosophical scepticism.

5 MARK QUESTIONS
5 mark questions are very similar to 3 mark questions except you will be asked to explain
a slightly more detailed concept or argument. Again, don’t write too much - just define
any key terms in the question and then explain the idea or concept.

|Marks |

Levels of response mark scheme

5

A full, clear and precise explanation. The student makes logical links between
precisely identified points, with no redundancy.

4

|A clear explanation, with logical links, but some imprecision/redundancy.

|3

The substantive content of the explanation is present and there is an attempt at
logical linking. But the explanation is not full and/or precise.

2

One or two relevant points made, but not precisely. The logic is unclear.

ie

Fragmented points, with no logical structure.

0

Nothing written worthy of credit

Example 5/5 responses
Outline the differences

between

cognitivist and

non-cognitivist

accounts

of moral

language. (5 marks)

Cognitivism and non-cognitivism are accounts of what moral judgements, such as
“murder is wrong’, mean. On the cognitivist account, moral judgements are
cognitive statements that aim to describe the world and are capable of being true
or false. For example, “murder is wrong” is true if murder has the property of
wrongness. On the non-cognitivist account, moral judgements express non-

256

