Philosophical Review

NISHI SHAH

gio Tenenbaum, Kevin Toh, Maura Tumulty, and two anonymous readers for
the Philosophical Review. I also am indebted to an audience at New York University for a stimulating discussion of this paper. Work on this paper was supported by a faculty research grant from Amherst College.
1 See Richard Moran, “Making Up Your Mind: Self-Interpretation and SelfConstitution,” Ratio n.s. 1 (1988): 135–51, at 146, and his book Authority and
Estrangement (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), 60–65. In the book
(61), he argues that it is a mistake to think of “transparency” as expressing the
claim that, for example, the questions, “Do I believe that there will be a third
world war?” and “Is it true that there will be a third world war?” are indistinguishable from or reducible to each other, because the fact that answers the
question about the war is different from the fact about a particular person’s
belief, and anyone asking himself these questions knows this. But he does not
consider whether the deliberative question whether to believe there will be a
third world war is indistinguishable from or reducible to the question of
whether it is true that there will be a third world war, and whether it is the relations between these two questions that is meant by “transparency.” It is quite
plausible that, for this pair of questions, the fact that answers one question also
answers the other question, since the deliberative question whether to believe that
p is not answered by any psychological fact about oneself, and anyone who asks
himself these questions must know that the questions are answered in the
same way. If “reducibility” just means that the same facts answer both questions, and “indistinguishable” just means that an agent cannot think that the
questions have different answers, then it may very well be that “transparency”
refers to relations of reduction and indistinctness.
2 It is natural to associate a use of ‘ought’ with the prescription to believe p
only if p is true. But ‘ought’ has multiple uses, including an all-things-considered usage that may factor in considerations of desirability. Therefore, in
order to avoid misunderstanding, from now on I will refrain from couching
my proposal in terms of a directive ought, which might be confused with this
other type of ought, and stick to speaking in terms of ‘correctness’, where
accepting truth as the standard of correctness for belief involves accepting a
directive to believe that p only if p is true.
3 I will use the boldface belief to refer to the concept of belief, ‘belief’ to
refer to the word, and belief (plain text) to refer to the property of being a
belief, or when it is left open whether the metaphysics or the semantics of
belief is being referred to. I may also omit the boldface when I use the phrase
‘concept of belief’.
4 Of course, whether we agree on which norm I am to accept will depend
upon whether we share the same higher-order norms. That is, we must agree
on the kinds of reasons that justify the acceptance of norms governing the fulfillment of professional obligations, and this is a matter of whether we accept
the same higher-order norms for selecting lower-order norms.
5 See Allan Gibbard, Wise Choices, Apt Feelings (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990), chap. 3.
6 Ibid., 46.
7 It may be that, as ascribers of rationality to beliefs, we are also committed

476

Published by Duke University Press

