Philosophical Review

NISHI SHAH

his account, to judge a belief warranted on the basis of the reasons one
has for thinking it desirable. Gibbard’s account thus does not have a
way to distinguish norms of desirability from the type of norms that
guide doxastic deliberation. He does not have the resources to distinguish these two different dimensions of endorsement precisely
because he wants his concept of warrant to be general enough to capture what is common to all genuinely normative judgments. If Gibbard
were to force an evidential constraint into the concept of warrant as
such, so that he could capture the evidential constraint on norms of
rational belief, then he would lose the ability to account for rationality
judgments about cognitive attitudes other than belief, such as judgments of what it is rational to assume for the sake of argument or to
imagine for the sake of a fantasy. Norms of rationality for these other
cognitive attitudes are not evidentially constrained, and therefore a
theorist who wants to use a single normative concept to elucidate the
many different varieties of normative judgment, as Gibbard does, cannot evidentially constrain that concept. Given Gibbard’s purposes, his
concept of warrant cannot accommodate an interpretation of his comments that would allow him to distinguish the endorsement involved in
judging a belief rational from that involved in judging it desirable. 21
In any case, remember that the goal of this paper is first and foremost to explain transparency, not to explain the evidential character of
doxastic norms. Even if Gibbard were to give up the ambition of giving
a general account of normative judgment, instead tailoring his account
of warrant specifically to capture our evidentially constrained concept
of rational belief and thereby availing himself of the second interpretation of his comments, this move would not explain transparency.
This is not to make a criticism of Gibbard’s theory, since it may very well
be adequate to fulfilling his own (now more limited) explanatory ambitions. My point is that a norm-expressivist account of (evidential) warrant isn’t adequate to my purpose, which is to explain why in asking
oneself whether to believe that p one is forced to recognize that this question is answered by, and only by, determining whether p is true. To see
this, notice that transparency would survive our adopting pragmatic
norms (if only we could). For example, even if the cuckholded husband were able to accept pragmatic doxastic norms that licensed
believing that his wife is faithful, he would still be unable to conclude
deliberation until he had discovered (by his lights) whether it is true
that his wife is faithful. He would be in the unfortunate position of
accepting doxastic norms that he was unable to implement in his dox456

Published by Duke University Press

