rightfully. Illegally acquired income or property was not admitted by them as something
that could be called "sustenance".
Finally, Ibn Khaldoun linked income to
human labour. He insisted that human labour
is necessary for earning income and forming
capital. He further linked civilization itself to
human labour, saying: "You should know that
when the human labour is all gone or decreased
by regression of civilization, God will then
allow earnings to terminate. Cities with few inhabitants can be observed to offer little sustenance and profits, or none whatsoever, because
little human labour is available. Likewise, in
cities with a larger supply of labour, the inhabitants enjoy better welfare and have more luxuries."
The same motivating concern can be found
in the writings of the early leaders of quantification in economics: William Petty, Gregory
King, François Quesnay, Antoine Lavoisier
and Joseph Lagrange, the grandparent of gross
national product (GNP) and gross domestic
product (GDP). It is also clear in the writings
of the leading political economists: Adam
Smith, David Ricardo, Robert Malthus, Karl
Marx and John Stuart Mill.
The notion of human development, as introduced in the first Human Development
Report in 1990, was an extension of that long
but recently obscured tradition. It questioned
the relevance of the unique preoccupation with
equating GNP with development and thus
shifted the development paradigm. It put people back where they belong--at the centre of
the development debate and dialogue--and it
created an impact far beyond the expectations
of its founding parents in 1990 (box 1.3).
The human development concept is
broader than other people-oriented approaches to development. Human-resource development emphasizes only human capital and
treats human beings as an input in the development process, but not as its beneficiaries. The
basic-needs approach focuses on minimum requirements of human beings, but not on their
choices. The human-welfare approach looks at
people as recipients, but not as active participants in the processes that shape their lives.
Human development, by encompassing all
these aspects, represents a more holistic approach to development.

MEASURING HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT
A concept is always broader than any of its proposed measures. Any suggested measure for
any concept cannot fully capture the richness
and the breadth of the concept. This is true of
the notion of human development as well.
In principle, human choices and their outcomes can be infinite and change over time.
However, the three essential ones at all levels of
development are for people to lead a long and
healthy life, to acquire knowledge and to have
access to resources needed for a decent standard of living. If these essentials are not available, many other opportunities remain
inaccessible.
The HDR 1990 therefore constructed a
composite index, the human development
index (HDI) on the basis of these three basic
dimensions of human development. The HDI
contains four variables: life expectancy at
birth, to represent the dimension of a long,
healthy life; adult literacy rate and combined
enrolment rate at the primary, secondary and
tertiary levels, to represent the knowledge dimension; and real GDP per capita (purchasing
power parity (PPP)US$), to serve as a proxy for

A concept is always
broader than any of
its proposed
measures. This is true
of the notion of
human development
as well.

BOX 1.3

Impact of the human development reports
The Human Development Reports
(HDRs) over the last 12 years have covered a series of key issues as their themes.
These themes range from public expenditure for human development, to participation, to economic growth and human
development. Such issues as gender and
human development, human poverty,
human development in a globalized
world, human rights and human development, and technology for human development have also been addressed in
HDRs.
All these reports with their analysis,
data and policy discussions have had a
significant impact on development
thinking and practice. First, they initiated new policy debates and dialogues at
the national level and influenced policymakers to come up with new policy
strategies. Second, they encouraged the
disaggregation of various human-development indicators in terms of gender, regions, ethnic groups, etc. Such data
clearly indicated intra-country dispari-

ties and inequalities and helped governments to direct necessary resources to
formulate required policies. Third, development activists, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and institutions
of civil society have used the Reports as
advocacy documents. Fourth, significant
academic research has been undertaken
to expand the frontiers of human development, in terms of analytical frameworks, indices and statistical work and
policy recommendations. Fifth, HDRs
are being used as reference materials in
universities and academic institutions.
One important by-product of the
global HDRs is the more than 260 national HDRs (NHDRs) produced in over
120 countries. Some of these countries
have produced these NHDRs for more
than five years. These NHDRs have become important catalysts for national
policies and strategies; they have also
served as repositories of innovative data
and as crucial advocacy tools.

Source: Jahan, 2001.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: DEFINITION, CONCEPT AND LARGER CONTEXT

17

