Language and Interest in the Economy:
A White Paper on “Humanomics”
Deirdre N. McCloskey 1
Economics ignores persuasion in the economy. The economics of asymmetric
“information” or common “knowledge” over the past 40 years reduces to costs and
benefits but bypasses persuasion, “sweet talk.” Sweet talk accounts for a quarter of
national income, and so is not mere “cheap talk.” The research would direct economics
and the numerous other social sciences influenced by economics back towards human
meaning in speech—meaning which has even in the most rigorously behaviorist
experiments been shown to matter greatly to the outcome. Sweet talk is deeply
unpredictable, which connects it to the troubled economics of entrepreneurship,
discovery, and innovation. The massive innovation leading to the Great Fact of modern
economic growth since 1800 is an important case in point. Some economic historians are
beginning to find that material causes of the Great Fact do not work, and that changes in
rhetoric such as the Enlightenment or the Bourgeois Revaluation do. A new economic
history emerges, using all the evidence for the scientific task: books as much as bonds,
entrepreneurial courage and hope as much as managerial prudence and temperance.

A worrying feature of economics as presently constituted is that it ignores language
working in the economy. To put it another way, economics has ignored the humanities and
related social sciences, such as cultural anthropology, with their studies of human meaning.
Adam Smith spoke often of “the faculty of speech,” and considered meaning, but his followers
gradually set them aside. Until the 1930s the setting aside was gentle and non-dogmatic,
allowing for occasional intrusions of human meaning such as Keynes on animal spirits or
Dennis Robertson on economized love. But in the shadow of 20th-century positivism, and
under the influence of Lionel Robbins and Paul Samuelson and Gary Becker and others, the
study of the economy was reduced strictly to “behavior” (yet oddly ignoring linguistic
behavior).
But what, an economist would ask, of studies by Marschak and Stigler and Akerlof and
others on the transmittal of information? Yes: information is linguistically transmitted, and
surely one of the main developments in economics since the 1970s has been the introduction of
information and signaling. But the sort of language that can be treated by routine application of
marginal benefit and marginal cost—which is the bed on which all studies of language in the
1

Distinguished Professor of Economics, History, English, and Communication, University of Illinois at Chicago

1

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1889320

