BOX 1.6

IN SEARCH OF AN ADEQUATE MEASURE OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT,
AN ALTERNATIVE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX, AHDI
Nader Fergany
Introduction
It is widely recognised that the standard measure of human
development (HD), the human development index (HDI)
does not capture the rich content of the HD concept. In
fact the popularity of the HDI has sometimes meant that
HD is reduced to nothing more than human resources development (HRD), an unfortunate misunderstanding. This
is indicated in the present chapter and emphasised in
chapter 2 in the context of analysing significant human development deficits in the Arab region. The latter analysis
confirms the region suffers from significant human development deficits that nonetheless do not register on a country’s standing on the HDI.
The need to construct an adequate measure of HD is
now well established. Indeed, the search for a better measure of HD is thus a pressing task for the human development movement.
This exploratory analysis aims at initiating a process
of innovation that could culminate in constructing an adequate measure of human development. The territory to explore is rugged and therefore calls for ingenuity as well as
perseverance.
The approach of this analysis is rather simple. It uses
a flexible yet robust method to compose a number of
human development indicators into a human development
index deemed sufficient to approximate the rich content
of HD. The method used is the Borda rule, a rank sum
function that calls for the minimum technical requirements
of the constituent indicators. The requirement is that the
indicator can be used to arrive at an unambiguous ranking
of alternatives (units of analysis, countries in our case) on
the dimension of human development measured by the indicator. Given the ranking of alternatives, the Borda rule
assembles the rankings of alternatives on the indicators
considered into a single value, the rank sum, which produces a complete ordering of alternatives on the indicators
used and hence is a valid social welfare function.
(Dasgupta, 1993). We call the resulting rank-sum an alternative human development index (AHDI).
This procedure produces only ranking of countries.
As the objective here is to put the need for a better measure of human development on the human development
research agenda, it is sufficient to produce country rankings. However, it would be a simple matter to compute
AHDI values on the basis of the set of indicators proposed
here .
The indicators proposed here were, in part, motivated by the human development deficits in the Arab region given in chapter 2, defined to express human
functionings, hence human capabilities, or freedoms and
deemed, as such, to have universal validity. In addition,
availability of data for a large number of countries was also
a criterion for the inclusion of an indicator .
The indicators used in this analysis are, in order:
• Life expectancy at birth, LE, as a general measure of
longevity and overall health.
• Educational attainment, EA as a means of knowledge
acquisition.
• Freedom score, FS, as used in Chapter 1 and 2, defined to express enjoyment of civil and political liberties, a
universally sought objective as well as to reflect the freedom deficit in the Arab region.
• GEM, as computed by UNDP, to express women’s
access to power in society in general, as well as reflect the
women empowerment deficit in the Arab region.

• Internet hosts per-capita, IH, to reflect ICT connectivity (access to ICT), to express a universally recognised
requirement for benefiting from globalisation in this age,
as well as to reflect the knowledge acquisition deficit in the
Arab region.
• CDE, Carbon dioxide emissions per-capita (metric
tons), defined as a penalty, to reflect damage to the environment .
As such the proposed indicators are universally valued functionings. In that sense, these are also developmental outcomes. Hence, the indicators proposed here have
global relevance that extends beyond the Arab countries.
As a result, the set of six variables seems to provide a good
starting point for constructing indices of human development. The proposition is surely worth pursuing, and refining.
It can be anticipated that the utilisation of this set of
indicators will, compared to the HDI, penalise Arab countries, an anticipation that would be borne out by the construction of such an AHDI. But we think that this is not a
serious shortcoming. Penalised also will be any country in
the world that does not perform well on the six indicators
proposed, including some of the highest ranking countries
on both income and HDI, which are to be, rightly, penalised for their extensive contribution to global warming
through CDE thus spoiling the world’s atmosphere for all.
More important in our judgement than any country’s
position on the AHDI is the conviction, articulated above,
that the proposed indicators are genuinely valid yardsticks
for measuring human development in this age of globalisation. In other words, countries, Arab or otherwise, that
want to perform on human development, need to perform
on freedom for all incorporating women’s empowerment,
knowledge acquisition, including ICT connectivity, improving health and safeguarding the environment.
As expected, the five variables: LE, EA, FS, IH and
GEM are positively correlated with HDI and themselves.
CDE, defined negatively to reflect damage to the environment, however, comes out negatively correlated with all
other indicators
Structurally, the AHDI consists of the two fundamental human capabilities: living a long and healthy life
and knowledge acquisition through education. This it can
be claimed is the irreducible core of human development.
The exclusion of income from the AHDI was meant
to de-emphasise the importance of average income as a
measure of human development in general as well as to reflect the deficit of human capabilities relative to income in
Arab countries. Properly understood, human development
philosophy proposes human capabilities, especially freedom, rather than command over goods and services
though income, as the ultimate means of human empowerment. It is freedom, not income that empowers human beings to achieve valued functionings. Thus, beyond the two
fundamental human capabilities of health and knowledge
acquisition, a human being needs to be empowered by
freedom for all. It is time that average income be dethroned as the primary means of empowerment in human
societies.
This is indeed a major departure from the HDI and,
from the vantagepoint of the concept of human development, a definite improvement. Freedom for all does not
admit the disempowerment of any group, be it women, the
poor or a religious or ethnic minority. In other words, freedom for all incorporates women’s empowerment, indeed

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: DEFINITION, CONCEPT AND LARGER CONTEXT

empowerment for all.
Nevertheless, disempowerment of women remains a
major impediment to human development in many parts
of the world, especially in the Arab region as noted in
chapter2. As a result, we believe there is a strong case for
explicitly incorporating a measure of women empowerment in the AHDI to stress this aspect of freedom for all.
This indirectly adds to the weight of the freedom score in
the AHDI by placing an emphasis on gender equity as well
as to reflect the women empowerment deficit in the Arab
region.
The inclusion of two indicators of knowledge acquisition, EA and IH , is meant to reflect the emphasis on
knowledge acquisition stressed throughout the report and
to express the critical importance of ICT in this age of
global connectivity. The two variables together give knowledge acquisition a higher weight than LE for example, reflecting the deficit of knowledge (education) relative to
health (LE) in the Arab region.
The human capability of being able to enjoy a safe
environment translates, on the societal level, into a measure of environmental responsibility towards the global environment.
AHDI Values
To gain an appreciation of the implication of the proposed approach to the measurement of HD we examine in
some detail the results of applying AHDI.
AHDI turns out to be strongly and positively correlated with the HDI (rank correlation coefficient = +0.904).
This strong correlation between the two indices perhaps
indicates that they belong to the same family of measures.
However, the position of individual countries on the
range of the AHDI is reshuffled thoroughly. It is important to note that the rank of an individual country on HDI
reported here, does not have to tally with the rank reported in the HDR. The ranks given here are based on the
Borda ranking rule and not on the values of HDI, in addition to the fact that the rankings given here are limited to
the 111 countries covered by the present analysis (compared to 174 in the HDR).
This reshuffling of positions is reflected, at the level
of world regions, utilising the average rank of countries of
the region, in Figure 1. A higher rank represents a worse
human development position.
The same mapping is presented, on the level of the
111 countries, in Figure 2. Sweden comes on top of the
AHDI, while Canada is demoted to No. 3 (out of 111, it
was No. 1 of 174 on HDI, 1998). The USA, UK, France
and Germany do not make the top ten on the AHDI.
Scandinavian countries, on the other hand, make a strong
showing in the top ten on the AHDI.
Of the 14 Arab countries included in the analysis,
four place in the ten lowest AHDI values: Syria, Sudan,
Mauritania, and Iraq.
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon and UAE, in order, top the
list of Arab countries on AHDI, followed by Morocco and
the Comoros, Egypt and Tunisia. This order perhaps reflects differences in human welfare better than the HDI
ranking.
As expected, the position of all Arab countries deteriorates, to varying extent, on moving from HDI to AHDI
but, especially Kuwait and the UAE, lose place considerably. Only Jordan and Comoros essentially retain their relative placing on both indices.

21

