economy have been laid down—is merely the transmittal of information or commands: “I offer
$4.15 for a bushel of corn”; “I accept your offer”; “You’re fired.” The trouble is that a large part
of economic talk is not merely informational or commanding but persuasive: “Your price is
absurdly high”; “We need to work together if our company is to succeed”; “I have a brilliant
idea for making cooling fans for automobiles, and you should invest in it”; “The new iPhone is
lovely.”
Does it matter? Does persuasive economic talk have economic significance? Yes. One
can show on the basis of detailed occupational statistics for the U.S. that about a quarter of
income in a modern economy is earned by “sweet talk”—not lies or trickery always, but mainly
the honest persuasion that a manager must exercise in a society of free workers or that a teacher
must exercise to persuade her students to read books or that a lawyer must exercise if a society
of laws is be meaningful. The economy values sweet talk at one quarter of its total income, a
gigantic and economically meaningful sum. If language in the economy was merely “cheap
talk,” as the non-cooperative game theorists put it, then ignoring it would not matter, and its
share of economic would drift towards zero: an economic agent would be no more valuable if
she were sweet than if she were a mere pipe for transmitted bids and asks. The chattering
character of people in markets and firms and households about their economic affairs would be
like left-handedness or red hair: interesting for some purposes doubtless in the Department of
English, but irrelevant to the tough, scientific matter of the economy. But that is not the case.
Formal maximum-utility economics cannot explain the sweet talk. The research would
need to establish the fact beyond doubt, bringing together for example mathematical
economists and rhetorical theorists. It can be treated mathematically by showing that
cooperative equilibria (for example) cannot be achieved without a trust created by earnest talk.
In a way it is the oldest and most obvious finding of game theory that games have of course
always a context of rules and customs and relationships, all of them affected by language.
But the main emphasis in a research that would matter for the future of the social
sciences would focus steadily on the facts of the matter, and not chiefly on the abstract theory
(the abstract theory can yield any conclusion if permitted to choose any assumptions, as a
matter of logic; the facts constrain the conclusions scientifically). At one level, sweet talk
emerges as crucial to experiments and field studies, as Eleanor Ostrom and her colleagues have
shown. Indeed, experimental economics in the past twenty years has shown that allowing
experimental subjects to establish relationships (“true”) through conversation radically changes
the degree of cooperation. "The bonds of words are too weak,” Hobbes declared, “to bridle
men's ambitions, varice, anger, and other passions, without the fear of some coercive power." It
appears that Hobbes was wrong. Businesses work with trust, “Good old trustworthy Max”—
not Max U, the maximizer of utility in a Samuelsonian way, who cannot be trusted at all.
2

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1889320

