32

Philosophy of Biology

sometimes promote dehumanization (Kronfeldner 2018). If humans can participate to a greater or lesser degree in human nature, then one might think that they
vary in the degree to which they are fully human. A trait bin approach can have
this problem, since individuals vary in the number of traits they possess that
belong to the nature bin. But the LTC account has no bins and thus sidesteps this
problem.

5.2 Does the LTC Account Leave the Human Out of Human Nature?

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108685481 Published online by Cambridge University Press

You are hopefully now convinced that the LTC account may be able to serve as
the prime subject of the human sciences. But perhaps you have qualms about the
account, or more generally about linking human nature with the sciences in this
way. Might such an account of human nature be drained of the important
features we would want from it, that the cost of tying it to the sciences is too
great? The anthropologist Tim Ingold, in a review of Elizabeth Hannon and Tim
Lewens’s 2018 edited collection, Why We Disagree About Human Nature,
argued that “one of the oddities of this book is that while its contributors have
much to say about the concept of nature, and its application to humanity, they
are largely silent about the concept of the human itself” (Ingold 2019). He goes
on to challenge my chapter in particular – a chapter in which I make the case for
linking human nature and the human sciences via a trait cluster account. As he
puts it:
Now of course, what people do, why and how, can be guided by both intuitive
judgment and religious prescription. What Ramsey seems to be saying,
however, is that to study human nature is to set aside whatever people
might feel about their doings, as well as any moral or religious conviction
with which they may be freighted, in favour of a scientiﬁcally dispassionate
observation of human behaviour, as it were from the outside. It is to place
scientists in a realm above and beyond the world they study, immunised from
any infection that might come from a too close or intimate contact with it.
Now of course it is precisely this closeness and intimacy – this feeling for the
world of which we are intrinsically a part, and to which we owe our very
existence as living beings within it – that lies at the heart of intuitive or
religious sensibility. Ramsey’s declaration, in writing off such sensibility
from any study of what it means to be human, amounts in effect to
a defence of normal science, and of the absolute separation of knowing
from being on which it depends. Yet are not practitioners of the human
sciences – among whom Ramsey includes psychologists, sociologists,
anthropologists and economists – also human beings themselves? And as
such, are they not inevitably embroiled in responsibilities towards those
among whom they work and study, and whose ways they seek to understand?
(Ingold 2019)

