Aspects of Science

science as a cultural as well as a practical achievement. How we
think about the objectivity of science will affect our views about
its place in a well-rounded education, its social role, and much
else. Time spent in becoming clearer about these matters will not
be wasted.
Some thirty years ago, a remarkable Polish writer, Leon
Chwistek, opened his book The Limits of Science with the follow¬
ing words:
We are living in a period of unparalleled growth of anti-rationalism. Exact thinking based upon the principle of consistency is
the sacrificial goat to which all the disasters of our time have
been imputed. . . . Exact thinking is blamed for drying up the
sources of the sacred enthusiasm and for causing the emotional
exhaustion of our epoch. Exact thinking, it is alleged, has be¬
come the source of the excessive growth of materialistic culture,
as well as the shrinkage and sterilization of spiritual life. The
demand for a new logic, for new laws of thought more suitable
to the needs of spiritual life has become the hobbyhorse for a
whole galaxy of obscure and false doctrine. . . . We have en¬
tered into a period ofincredible abasement of science, a period of
the noisy superiority of groups of puffed up eulogists of irra¬
tional nonsense who are leading mankind toward open crime
and violence—as a rule unknowingly but often quite
consciously.1
Chwistek would have been appalled to know that his denun¬
ciation would still apply to the conditions of our intellectual life
over thirty years later. We are living in a period of great and
widespread contempt for science and contempt for the rational
mode of thought of which science is a supreme embodiment. Let
me take, as one example of many, some of the remarks made by
Theodore Roszak in his influential book Where the Wasteland
Ends.
In speaking of the “synthesis” achieved by Newton, Roszak
says: “The world picture was homogenized and qualitatively
flattened. For the first time in the Western tradition, the universe
became in the most objective sense of the word a ‘Universe’: a
cosmos uniform throughout its infinite extent, devoid of ethical
60

