First Enquiry

David Hume

is still more despised; and at a time and place where learning
flourishes, nothing is regarded as a surer sign of an ill-bred
cast of mind than having no taste at all for learning. The best
kind of character is supposed to lie between those extremes:
retaining an equal ability and taste for books, company, and
business; preserving in conversation that discernment and
delicacy that arise from literary pursuits, and in business
preserving the honesty and accuracy that are the natural
result of a sound philosophy. In order to spread and develop
such an accomplished kind of character, nothing can be more
useful than writings in the easy style and manner, which stay
close to life, require no deep thought or solitary pondering to
be understood, and send the reader back among mankind
full of noble sentiments and wise precepts, applicable to
every demand of human life. By means of such writings,
virtue becomes lovable, the pursuit of knowledge agreeable,
company instructive, and solitude entertaining.

1: Different kinds of philosophy

things that are human and directly relevant to action and
society. As for abstruse thought and profound researches,
I prohibit them, and if you engage in them I will severely
punish you by the brooding melancholy they bring, by the
endless uncertainty in which they involve you, and by the
cold reception your announced discoveries will meet with
when you publish them. Be a philosopher, but amidst all
your philosophy be still a man.’
If people in general were contented to prefer the easy philosophy to the abstract and profound one, without throwing
blame or contempt on the latter, it might be appropriate to
go along with this general opinion, and to allow every man to
enjoy without opposition his own taste and sentiment. But
the friends of the easy philosophy often carry the matter
further, even to point of absolutely rejecting all profound
reasonings, or what is commonly called metaphysics; ·and
this rejection should not be allowed to pass unchallenged·.
So I shall now proceed to consider what can reasonably be
pleaded on behalf of the abstract kind of philosophy.
Let us first observe that the accurate and abstract kind
of philosophy has one considerable advantage that comes
from its being of service to the other kind. Without help from
abstract philosophy, the easy and human kind can never
be exact enough in its sentiments, rules, or reasonings. All
literature is nothing but pictures of human life in various
attitudes and situations, and these inspire us with different sentiments of praise or blame, admiration or ridicule,
according to the qualities of the object they set before us. An
artist must be better qualified to succeed in presenting such
pictures if, in addition to delicate taste and sensitive uptake,
he has an accurate knowledge of the internal structure and
operations of the understanding, the workings of the passions, and the various kinds of sentiment that discriminate
vice and virtue. However difficult this search into men’s

Man is •a reasonable being, and as such he gets appropriate food and nourishment from the pursuit of knowledge;
but so narrow are the limits of human understanding that
we can’t hope for any great amount of knowledge or for much
security in respect of what we do know. As well as being
reasonable, man is •a sociable being; but he can’t always
enjoy—indeed can’t always want—agreeable and amusing
company. Man is also •an active being; and from that
disposition of his, as well as from the various necessities of
human life, he must put up with being busy at something;
but the mind requires some relaxation, and can’t always
devote itself to careful work. It seems, then, that nature
has pointed out a mixed kind of life as most suitable for
the human race, and has secretly warned us not to tilt too
far in any of these directions and make ourselves incapable
of other occupations and entertainments. ‘Indulge your
passion for knowledge,’ says nature, ‘but seek knowledge of
3

