First Enquiry

David Hume

whole operation is performed, so far from being directly and
fully known by an inward feeling or consciousness, is utterly
mysterious and impossible to understand? The mind wills a
certain event: immediately another event is produced, one
that we don’t know and that is totally different from the
one intended; this event produces another, which is equally
unknown; and finally, through a long sequence ·of such
intermediaries·, the desired event is produced. But if the
original power were felt, it would be known; if it were known
its effect would also be known, because all power is relative
to its effect—·that is, knowing a power is knowing it as
the-power-to-produce-x for some specific x·. And vice versa:
if the effect isn’t known ·in advance·, the power can’t be
known or felt. Indeed, how can we be conscious of a power
to move our limbs when we have no such power? All we have
is a power to move certain animal spirits which, though they
eventually make our limbs move, operate in a manner that
is wholly beyond our understanding.

own minds when, by an act or command of our will, we
·make something happen in our minds; for example, when
we· raise up a new idea, make our mind focus on it, turn
it on all sides, and finally dismiss it when we think that we
have inspected it with enough accuracy? [See note on page 2
regarding ‘accuracy’.] I believe the same arguments will show
that even this command of the will gives us no real idea of
force or energy.
(1) It must be allowed that when we know a power we
know what it is about the cause that enables it to produce
the effect. For these are supposed to be synonymous. [That
is, ‘x’s power to produce y’ is supposed to be synonymous with ‘what it is
about x that enables it to produce y’.] To know the power, therefore,
we must know both the cause and effect and the relation
between them. But do we claim to be acquainted with the
nature of the human mind and the nature of an idea, or the
aptitude of the mind to produce the idea? Producing an idea
is a real creation, a production of something out of nothing;
and that implies a power so great that it may seem at first
sight to be beyond the reach of any finite being. At least it
must be admitted that such a power isn’t felt or known by
the mind, and isn’t even conceivable by it. We only feel the
event, namely the existence of an idea following a command
of the will. How this operation is performed, the power by
which it is produced, is entirely beyond our understanding.
(2) Like its command over the body, the mind’s command
over itself is limited; and these limits are not known by

From all of this we can safely conclude that our idea
of power is not copied from any feeling or consciousness
of power within ourselves when we get our limbs to perform their normal functions. That their motion follows the
command of the will is something we find from common
experience, like other natural events; but the power or energy
by which this is brought about, like that in other natural
events, is unknown and inconceivable.6 Well, then, shall
we assert that we are conscious of a power or energy in our
6

7: The idea of necessary connection

It may be claimed that the resistance we meet with in bodies, because it often requires us to exert our own force and call up all our power, gives
us the idea of force and power. ·According to this view·, this strong endeavour that we are conscious of in ourselves is the original impression from
which this idea is copied. ·There are two objections to this·. (i) We attribute power in a vast number of cases where we never can suppose that this
resistance or exertion of force occurs: to God, who never meets with any resistance; to the mind in its command over its ideas and limbs, in common
thinking and motion, where the effect follows immediately upon the will without any exertion or summoning up of force; to inanimate matter, which
is not capable of conscious effort. (ii) This feeling of an endeavour to overcome resistance has no known connection with any event. We know by
experience what follows it; we could not know it a priori. Still, it must be admitted that the animal effort which we experience, though it cannot give
us an accurate precise idea of power, looms large in the common everyday inaccurate idea which is formed of it.

33

