The Impact of Newton on Biology on the Continent

they are alien to it, and are not common to all parts of matter. Light and fire are not
heavy, water is not elastic, minerals are not irritable.26
Whereas Maupertuis, Buffon, Needham and even Wolff considered their new forces
and qualities to belong to every particle of matter – even if only latently – Haller ascribes
his new force of irritability only to specific subsystems of matter. He views it (and
apparently all active forces) as superadded to matter or even as immaterial in origin.
Buffon’s generation seems to have stuck to physical or chemical forces of attraction
and repulsion, perhaps guided in some way; but its members did not introduce biological
forces that acted in a goal-­directed manner. Buffon’s moule interieur is conceptualized as
the result of a dialectic of attractive and expansive forces, and even Maupertuis’ ‘principle
of intelligence’ is merely a phenomenal description specifying what the physical and
chemical forces of attraction and repulsion have to achieve.
This approach to explanation increases the number of basic properties of matter with
a view to explaining biological phenomena. The appearances of an organic system are
traced back to the basic properties and interactions of matter; some of the properties do
indeed play no role in mechanics, but they are still physical in a recognizable sense:
variations on the theme of attractive and repulsive central forces that cause the motion
or cohesion of particles. These material forces can bring bodies together or remove them
from one another, but the ‘direction’ of development is determined by the mechanical
circumstances – the structure of the vessels, the selection of particles in the germ or
perhaps even a template. Thus the explanation of the organism remains strictly
reductionist in two senses: the phenomena of a system are reduced to the properties and
interactions of the parts and biological explanation is reduced to physical explanation,
albeit somewhat enriched in comparison with simple corpuscularian mechanics.
The next step was to enrich the basic qualities of matter with genuinely biological
elements.
4 Vitalism
According to Hans Driesch vitalism ascribes to the phenomena of life an ‘autonomy’ that
cannot be reduced ‘to a special constellation of factors, known from the sciences of the
anorganic’27 and although he traces its roots back to Aristotle, it is clear to him that the
vitalism of the latter eighteenth century has a new quality. The various life forces
introduced by the Newtonians in the generations after Buffon are not emergent qualities
‘La Matière ne tient pas d’elle-­même ses pouvoirs. Elle pourroit être sans gravité, sans élasticité, sans
irritabilité; qualité nouvelle, mais essentielle à la structure des Plantes & des Animaux. Ces qualités n’entrent
pas dans son essence, elles lui sont etrangères, elles ne sont pas communes à toutes les parties de la Matière. La
Lumiere & le Feu ne pèsent pas, l’Eau n’est pas élastique, les Mineraux ne sont pas irritables’ (Haller 1751, 86).
27
‘Nicht die Frage, ob Lebensvorgänge das Beiwort “zweckmäßig” verdienen, macht das Problem des
“Vitalismus” aus, sondern diese Frage: ob das Zweckmäßige an ihnen einer besonderen Konstellation von
Faktoren entspringe, welche aus den Wissenschaften vom Anorganischen bekannt sind, oder ob es Ausfluß
ihrer Eigengesetzlichkeit sei’ (Driesch 1905, 1).
26

527

35414.indb 527

25/10/2018 13:35

