The Impact of Newton on Biology on the Continent

René Descartes (1595–1650) had tried to integrate not merely the function of the
animal machine into his mechanical-­corpuscular view of the world, but also its
production. The entire complexity and heterogeneity of the organic body was to be
materially represented in and determined by the germ:
If one knew exactly in detail all the parts of the seed of a particular species of
animal, for instance Man, one could deduce from that alone for reasons entirely
mathematical and certain, the whole figure and conformation of each of its parts,
just as the other way around knowing some particulars of this conformation one
can deduce from this what the seed is.13
There is a one-­to-one correlation between particles of the germ and parts of the body.
Descartes’ own somewhat obscure notions as to how the germ might be gradually
produced by various chemical processes acting under heat were not taken up by his
successors, but the idea that the germ contains all one needs to explain the organism was
almost universally accepted. The most common simile used to express the relation of
body to germ was the small image of the body in a convex mirror (Gassendi 1658, 275;
Legrand 1672, 797–98). The first generation after Descartes returned to the traditional
Hippocratic theory of pangenesis to explain the production of the germ. According to
pangenesis each part of the body sends a particle representing it through the blood (or
– with the Hippocratic tradition – through the nerves) to the organs of generation where
they coalesce into a miniature organism. Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655) tried to explain
how these particles could produce a rudimentary organism (‘epitome’) by invoking the
workmanship of the soul (Gassendi 1658, 275). At the same time Nathaniel Highmore
(1613–85) tried out a similar argument and started down an infinite regress by
distinguishing the ‘material atoms’ that pangenetically form the body (through the
workmanship of the soul) from the ‘formal’ or ‘spiritual’ atoms that pangenetically form
the soul (Highmore 1651, 83). The origin of organic form – or organization as it came to
be called – remained an unsolved problem. This led to the rise of the theory of the
preformation or pre-­existence of the germ, which attributed the production of the germ
directly to God.
The solution to the problem of the origin of organization that was to become
dominant for the next hundred years was first publicly formulated by Nicolas
Malebranche (1638–1715), who like Descartes, William Harvey (1578–1657) and
Highmore had systematically studied embryological development by opening eggs at
different stages of development. Malebranche allowed that God had created all the germs

13
‘Si on connoissoit bien quelles sont toutes les parties de la semence de quelque espece d’animal en particulier,
par exemple de l’homme, on pourroit deduire de cela seul, par des raisons entierement mathematiques
& certaines, toute la figure & conformation de chacun de ses membres; comme aussi reciproquement, en
connoissant plusieures particularitez de cette conformation, on peut deduire quelle est la semence’ (Descartes
1909 [1648], 277; italics P.M.).

521

35414.indb 521

25/10/2018 13:35

