InferrIng and exPlaInIng

102

t1. It was a fuke that the 928 articles showed

unlikely that most of the articles in the sample

no skepticism about the consensus view; the

came right out and said where they stood on

ISI database contained many articles that

the consensus view. Indeed, she tells us that

were skeptical.

some of the endorsement was implicit. Tat

t2. Although the sample told us something

must mean that her team had to “code,” or oth-

signifcant about the ISI database, it was a
coincidence that the articles they included
showed no skepticism when in fact many
peer-reviewed articles not included show
plenty of skepticism.
I have already conceded that both of these
rivals are logically possible. I want to insist, however, that they are very improbable. Remember
Giere’s “rule of thumb”? He tells us that for random
samples, the margin of error is a direct function of
the size of the sample. Samples of fve hundred
are accurate to about ±5 percent, and samples of
two thousand are accurate to about ±2 percent.
Tat means that Professor Oreskes’s sample has
an accuracy of, conservatively, ±4 percent. For
a statistician adopting a 95 percent confdence
level, there is only a 5 percent chance that the
population falls outside of the ±4 percent margin
of error. Could it happen? Yes. Is it likely at all? No.
Much more interesting rivals will have to do
with the problem of bias, either intentional or,
more likely, unintentional. I suspect that some
of you have already wondered if there might
be a bias in the ISI database. Maybe they only
list “green” articles. Again, the following rival
explanation is possible:
t3. The ISI database is biased in favor of the

erwise interpret, that article’s intention and
subsequent endorsement or nonendorsement.
Perhaps her team was so unconsciously wedded
to the consensus view that they misinterpreted
many of the articles as endorsing or taking no
stand when in fact the authors of those articles
intended a rejection of the consensus view. Tus
another possible rival explanation focuses on
the coding of the articles:
t4. Oreskes, because of her biases, misinterpreted many of the articles as favorable or
neutral when in fact the authors were arguing against the consensus view.
A fnal rival explanation centers on the possible bias of the entire scientifc community.
One might argue, as some have in defense of
“creation science,” that there is a kind of professional conspiracy that efectively censors
articles that challenge the consensus view (not
just of climate change but of any accepted scientifc theory) from being published in peerreviewed journals in the frst place. Here, the
rival does not really challenge the population
of peer-reviewed publications, but rather the
implied attitude of endorsement by working
scientists.

consensus view.
t5. Respectable scientists arguing against
A very diferent sort of bias is possible
because of Oreskes’s methodology. It is highly

the consensus view cannot get their articles
published in peer-reviewed journals.

