a very diferent story. Life is complicated and

I think that if I were the DA, I’d have asked the

flled with coincidences.

police for more investigation before bringing

He’d convinced the jury not to look at the Hamilton

like this is that the evidence must show that the

case as if it were a made-for-TV-movie, but rather as

defendant is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.

a slice of real life, full of irrelevant actions and coin-

Tat means not only that t0 must be a better

cidences. He’d asked the jurors how many of them had

explanation than t1 but that it must be much,

taken out life insurance on a loved one and what their

much, much better.

neighbors would have thought if the loved one died
shortly thereafer.9

Stories That Make Sense of Things

Both the DA and Abe were not just telling sto-

Perhaps the most obvious question in this entire

ries; they were arguing a case before a jury. Let

book is what exactly is an explanation in the frst

us assume that the facts were not in dispute and

place? Science has long struck philosophers as a

looked something like the following:

kind of paradigm of good reasoning. IBE comes
directly from the philosophy of science and

e1. Hamilton and his partner had a strained

has been treated not only as a model of scien-

personal and professional relationship.

tifc evidence but as scientifc discovery as well.

e2. Hamilton had recently encountered

Likewise, some of the most signifcant models

severe fnancial problems.

of explanation come from the natural sciences

e3. Hamilton had recently taken out a sizable
10

life insurance policy on his partner.

e4. Ten days later his partner was gunned
down by a professional hit man.

and philosophers seeking to model scientifc
thinking.
We need to begin by noting that explanations
are the result of things we do. We explain things.
Little Johnny is an inquisitive kid. He asks a

From the inference-to-the-best-explanation para-

lot of questions: “Why do I have to go to bed

digm, the DAand Abe ofer competing explanations.

now?” “Why was Aunt Jane so mad?” “Why do
stars ‘twinkle’?” Sometimes we decline to really

t0. Hamilton hired the hit man to gun down

answer his questions: “Because I said so!” “Tat’s

his partner so that he could collect on the

grown-up stuff; you wouldn’t understand.”

life insurance.

“Gee, that’s a good question—I don’t know.”

t1. Hamilton had nothing to do with his part-

Other times, however, we do him the courtesy

ner’s murder. It was pure coincidence that

of responding in as truthful and informative

the murder occurred so closely to the newly

way as we can: “You have to get up early tomor-

acquired life insurance policy.

row, and besides, I need the rest now.” “Well, I
think you hurt her feelings.” “It’s complicated,

Perhaps you’re like me and are not quite sure

but it has to do with light being refracted in the

which of these explanatory stories is the best.

atmosphere.” So what exactly is involved when

eVIdenCe, exPlanatIon, and narratIVe

the case to trial. Te standard in a murder trial

135

