142

R. Briggs

button and a nuclear war starts is much less similar to the actual world (in our
ordinary sense of ‘similar’) than a world in which Nixon presses the red button,
some mechanical malfunction prevents the rockets from launching, and life
continues as usual. Subsequent literature is filled with sophisticated attempts to
define an appropriate concept of similarity (Lewis 1979; Penczek 1997; Gundersen
2004; Kment 2006) and sophisticated counterexamples to them (Elga 2001;
Edgington 2004; Hawthorne 2005; Krasner and Heller 1994; Wasserman 2006). I
pass over these issues for the remainder of the article.
1.3 Causal models
The causal modeling account, defended by Galles and Pearl (1998), Pearl (2000),
Hitchcock (2001), Woodward and Hitchcock (2003), Woodward (2003), and
Hiddleston (2005), interprets points as causal models, and the selection function, in
terms of a submodel relation. Different developments of the causal modeling
framework differ in detail from one another, and from my own presentation, but
they agree in basic outline.
To illustrate the concept of a causal model, it will be helpful to refer to an
example from Pearl (2000, p. 207).
1.3.1 Execution
A firing squad (consisting of two executioners, X and Y) is about to shoot a
prisoner. If the court orders the execution, this will cause the captain to signal to the
executioners. Each executioner is posed to fire if, and only if, the captain signals.
Either executioner’s shot by itself will be enough to kill the prisoner. As a matter of
fact, the court does order the execution, so that the captain signals, the executioners
shoot, and the prisoner dies.
In the course of explaining what a causal model is, I will construct a causal model
EX to represent EXECUTION. In general, a causal model M is a triple hV; S; Ai.
I will explain each of these three elements below.
V is a finite set of variables ; fV1 ; V2 ; . . .Vn g: These variables pose questions
about spatiotemporally circumscribed events. In EX; V contains five variables:
U represents whether the court orders the execution.
C represents whether the captain signals.
X represents whether executioner X fires.
Y represents whether executioner Y fires.
D represents whether the prisoner dies.
Each V 2 V comes with a range RðVÞ of possible values—that is, answers to the
question posed by the variable. I assume that the answers to any given question are
mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive, and that no answer to one question
entails an answer to any other (so that for instance, the correct answer to the
question of whether the court ordered the execution does not logically entail the
correct answer to the question of whether the captain signals). The simplest

123

