Interventionist counterfactuals

141

The similarity semantics interprets the points as possible worlds; the causal
modeling semantics interprets them as models.
A selection function maps each point a and antecedent / to a set of points f ð/; aÞ:
/ h! w is true at a if w is true at every point in f(/, a) and false otherwise.1
The similarity semantics and the causal modeling semantics place different
interpretations on the selection function. I will explain both approaches, beginning
with the similarity semantics in Sect. 1.2, and moving on to the causal modeling
semantics in Sect. 1.3.
1.2 Similarity semantics
Lewis (1973a, b) interprets points as possible worlds, and interprets the selection
function in terms of comparative similarity or ‘‘closeness’’ among worlds. f(/, w),
Lewis suggests, is the set of ‘‘closest / worlds to w’’—i.e., the set of worlds where
/ is true which are at least as similar to w as any other world where / is true.2
Lewis (1973b, pp. 58–60) argues that once we place the appropriate structural
constraints on comparative similarity, the selection function must satisfy the
following four constraints, and that furthermore, any selection function satisfying
these constraints can be represented by an appropriately-structured similarity
relation.
(S1) If / is true at w, then f(/, w) = {w}.
(S2) / is true at every point in f(/, w).
(S3) If / is possible at w, then f ð/; wÞ 6¼ ;.
(S4) If w entails / and w is true at some points in f(/, w), then f ðw; wÞ ¼
fv 2 f ð/; wÞ : w is true at vg.
(S1) amounts to the requirement that every world be uniquely closest to itself,
(S2) to the requirement that A be true at all the closest A worlds to w, (S3) to the
requirement that if A is possible, some A worlds are closest to w, and (S4) to the
requirement that the relation Cw—where ‘‘w0 Cw w00 ’’ means that w0 is closer to w
than w00 is to w—has the structure of a total preordering.
While the structure of the similarity relation is uncontroversial, its content is a
matter of considerable dispute. As Fine (1975) points out, it can’t look much like
our ordinary notion of similarity. The sentence ‘‘if Nixon pressed the red button, a
nuclear war would have started’’ is true. But a world in which Nixon presses the red

1

Although this is the standard account of the relationship between selection and truth at a point, it is not
the the only possible account. We might say instead that / h! w is true at a if w is true at every point in
f(/, a), false at a if w is false at every point in f(/, a), and indeterminate otherwise. We would then need a
three-valued logic for assigning truth values to compounds of counterfactuals. Or we might say that
/ h! w is true at a if / is true at most points in f(/ a), and false otherwise. For simplicity’s sake, I will
ignore these alternatives and assume the standard account.
2

To ensure that we can use the concept of closeness to define a selection function, we need the Limit
Assumption, which forbids infinite sequences of closer and closer / worlds to w with none closest. I will
assume that the Limit Assumption holds; see Stalnaker (1981a, pp. 96–98) for a defense of it.

123

