Intuitions of three kinds in views on the continuum

25

That may be a reason to hope that the rationalist rather than the linguistic
picture is the correct one, but have we any reason to believe it is? Gödel does
not really address this question, but it seems clear to what evidence he
would point, and what kind of claim he would have to make about it,
namely, the claim that the standard axioms of set theory plus some large
cardinals “force themselves upon us,” even though they are not strictly
rigorously logically implied by the literal conventional linguistic meaning of
his exposition of the cumulative hierarchy or iterative conception of sets.
Readers may exercise their own intuitions to evaluate such a claim. For
what it is worth, I myself do feel that, say, inaccessible cardinals are implied
by the spirit but not the letter of Gödel’s exposition. To me, deciding for or
against inaccessibles seems a bit like a judge deciding one way or the other in
a kind of case that was never anticipated by the legislature and which the
literal meaning of the words of the applicable law does not settle unambiguously one way or the other. A decision in one direction may be in the spirit of
the law and in the other contrary to it, even though it cannot be said that the
letter of the law strictly implies the one or contradicts the other.
If all this is so, then the alleged instances of rational intuition that Gödel
cites cannot be explained as instances of linguistic intuition. But explaining
apparent rational intuitions as really linguistic intuitions is not the only
alternative to recognizing a special faculty of rational intuition. For there
may remain yet other kinds of intuition to be considered. After all, something
has led Gödel to his implausibility judgments about “extreme rareness” results.
It is certainly not linguistic intuition, and unless it can be claimed to be
rational intuition, it must be something else that we have not yet considered.
Nothing Gödel says suggests that he takes his implausibility judgments
to be clear rational intuitions. If they were, then he would presumably
advocate the denials of the consequences of CH judged implausible as new
axioms, comparable to the new axioms of inaccessible and Mahlo
cardinals; and this he does not do. Nothing Gödel says even suggests that
he has a dim, misty perception of any potential for new axioms out in the
direction of these implausibility judgments.34 The only directions from

34

It would be very diﬃcult to formulate any such new axiom about extreme rarity, since nothing is
more common in point-set theory than to ﬁnd that sets small in one sense are large in another.
Right at the beginning of the subject comes the discovery of the Cantor set, which is small
topologically (ﬁrst category) and metrically (measure zero), but large in cardinality (having the
power of the continuum). Another classic result is that the unit interval can be written as the union
of a ﬁrst category set and a measure zero set. See Oxtoby, (1971) for more information (The
particular result just cited appears as Corollary 1.7, p. 5.) The diﬃculty of ﬁnding a rigorous
formulation, however, is only to be expected with dim and misty rational intuitions.

