248

An Introduction to Metaphysics

among them.’ What is interesting is that these paraphrases seem not
to commit one to the existence of properties, just to things that could
amount to nothing more than Socrates, Plato, and some other ordinary
particulars.
Rayo and Yablo paraphrase sentence (3) differently from Boolos. They
think of (3) as saying that Socrates and Plato are the same way. Even better,
to avoid being sucked into thinking that there are such entities as ways,
they can paraphrase (3) as:
(3′) Socrates is somehow and Plato is likewise.

We can also give a parallel paraphrase of (2): ‘Wise is somehow Socrates and
Plato are.’ One thing that is nice about (3′) is that ‘somehow’ and ‘likewise’
don’t even appear as if they are quantifying over any entity. They don’t
replace a name or description; they replace the word ‘wise’ in ‘Socrates is
wise’ and in ‘Plato is wise’, respectively. There is no temptation to think
that there need be any property (not a trope or set of tropes, not a universal, not a set of possibilia) for an assertion made by (3′) to be true.
We have yet to try an Austere Nominalist paraphrase of sentence (4).
The usual place to begin is to suggest, ‘Everything humble is virtuous.’
Two criticisms are often made of this idea. First, it is usually pointed out
that, though humility is a virtue, not everything humble is virtuous. After
all, some things have their humility outweighed by their more numerous
or more serious vices with the consequence that, though they are humble,
they are not virtuous. We are not sure this criticism is a good one; it may
depend on a particular reading of ‘virtuous’ (virtuous in an all-thingsconsidered sense) rather than on another perfectly good reading (virtuous
in an in-some-manner-or-to-some-extent sense). Nevertheless, even if our
suspicion is right, there is the second criticism. Consider:
(6) Red is a color.

If one is tempted to paraphrase (4) as ‘Everything humble is virtuous,’ one
should also be tempted to paraphrase (6) as ‘Everything red is colored.’ So
far, so good. By parity of reasoning, one should then paraphrase
(7) Red is a shape

as ‘Everything red is shaped.’ That’s the problem. Though (4) and (6) are
true, (7) is false. Its paraphrase, if it really is a good paraphrase, should be

