24

Introduction to the Basic Principles of Marxism-Leninism

So, in discovering the origin of surplus value, Marx pointed out the exploitative nature
of capitalism [because capitalists essentially steal surplus labor value from workers
which is then transformed into profits], though this exploitative nature is concealed by
the money-commodity relationship.
Annotation 27

Under capitalism, a worker’s labor is a commodity which capitalists pay for with
money in the form of wages. Workers never know how much of their labor value is
being withheld by employers, which conceals the nature of capitalist wage-theft.
The theory of surplus value was deeply and comprehensively researched and presented in Capital1 by Marx and Engels. This work not only paves the way to form a new
political-economic theory system based on the working class’s viewpoint, it also firmly
consolidates and develops the historical-materialist viewpoint through the theory of
socio-economic forms.
Annotation 28

Karl Marx explained that the goal of writing Capital was “to lay bare the economic
law of motion of modern society.” By “laws of motion,” Marx refers to the origins and
motivations for change within human society. Historical materialism holds that human
society develops based on internal and external relationships within and between aspects of society. Historical materialism is the topic of Part 2 of the textbook from which
this entire text has been translated, which we hope to translate in the future.
According to the theory of socio-economic forms [which is the basis of historical
materialism], the movements and developments of human society are natural-historical
processes based on dialectical interactions between forces of production and relations
of production; between infrastructure basis [commonly referred to as “base” in English]
and superstructure.
Annotation 29

The forces of production consist of the combination of means of production and
workers within society. Under capitalism, the production force consists of the proletariat (working class) and means of production which are owned by the bourgeoisie
(capitalist class).
Marx viewed society as composed of an economic base and a social superstructure. The
base of society includes the material relationships between humans and the means
of productions and the material processes which humans undertake to survive and
transform our environment. The superstructure of society includes all components of
society not directly relating to production, such as media institutions, music, and art,
as well as other cultural elements like religion, customs, moral standards, and everything else which manifests primarily through conscious activity and social relations.
1 Das Kapital: Karl Marx’s most important contribution to political economy. It is composed of four
volumes. It is the work of Marx’s whole career and an important part of Engels’ career, as well. Marx
started writing Das Kapital in the 1840s and continued writing until he died (1883). Das Kapital I was
published in 1867. After Marx’s death, Engels edited and published the second volume in 1885 and the
third volume in 1894. The Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the USSR edited and published Das Kapital
IV, also known as Theories of Surplus-Value, in the 1950s, long after the death of Marx and Engels.

