17 • The Cluelessness Objection

Premise 1: Long-Term Cluelessness
Imagine a doctor saving the life of a pregnant woman many centuries ago.3 This
seems like a clearly good act. Alas, it turns out that the woman was an ancestor
of Hitler. So the seemingly good act turned out to have actually disastrous overall
consequences.
This example illustrates how we might fail to grasp the long-term effects of our
actions. But the point generalizes even to less dramatic actions, as small changes
can ripple unpredictably into the future. For example, one’s choice of whether or
not to drive on a given day will “advance or delay the journeys of countless others,
if only by a few seconds,”4 and they in turn will slightly affect others. Eventually
the causal chain will (however slightly) affect the timing of a couple conceiving
a child. A different sperm will fertilize the egg than would otherwise have been
the case, leading to an entirely different child being born. This different person
will make different life choices, impacting the timing of other couples’ conceptions, and the identity of the children they produce, snowballing into an ever
more different future. As a result, we should expect our everyday actions to have
momentous—yet unpredictable—long-term consequences. Some of these effects
will surely be very bad, and others very good. (We may cause some genocidal
dictators to come into existence thousands of years from now and prevent others.)
And we’ve no idea how they will balance out.
Long-term consequences swamp short-term ones in total value. And because
we generally can’t predict the long-term consequences of our actions, it follows
that we generally can’t predict the overall consequences of our actions.
But there may be some exceptions. Proponents of longtermism believe that
some actions—such as reducing existential risk—have robustly positive expected
value in the long term. So, at a minimum, the sub-conclusion (premise 2) needs
to be weakened to the claim that we’ve no idea what to do other than work on
reducing existential risks. But even this weakened claim would remain surprising:
it sure seems like we also have good reason to save lives in the here and now. The
next section evaluates whether this is so.
3. Adapted from Lenman, “Consequentialism and Cluelessness,” 344.
4. Hilary Greaves, “Cluelessness,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 116, no. 3 (October 2016):
314, https://doi.org/10.1093/arisoc/aow018.

191

