Consider, for example, the famous “duck-rabbit” illusion below (Jastrow 1899). With a little mental
effort, we can “switch” from seeing the picture as a duck to seeing it as a rabbit, and it arguably seems
like there is a shift in the way the picture looks. However, it is far from clear that our experience of the
low-level features of the image—the colors and shapes—actually changes. If that is right, then it might
provide evidence that there are special kinds of qualia associated with seeing the image as a duck and
seeing it as a rabbit.

A final important debate concerns whether non-perceptual states like thinking and understanding
might have special qualia associated with them. For example, quickly add together the numbers
17 and 48 in your head, and in doing so, consider what feelings or qualities are associated with
the experience. Was there a distinctive kind of feeling that accompanied your thoughts about the
numbers? Some philosophers have suggested that there is indeed a kind of special experience
3
associated with thinking and understanding. One argument for this kind of “cognitive qualia” (or
cognitive phenomenology, as it is also known) comes from cases of hearing a foreign language.
Imagine that Jack, an English speaker, and Jacques, a French speaker, are both listening to a French
radio broadcast. Jack cannot understand what he is hearing, but Jacques can. Intuitively, it seems
like there is a difference in the quality of their two experiences arising from the differences in their
understanding (or lack thereof). Again, the existence of these cognitive qualia is hotly contested.
Some philosophers claim, for example, that the qualities associated with experiences like thinking and
understanding can be understood just in terms of regular perceptual qualia, like colors and shapes,
occurring as images in our minds. Hence, perhaps any qualia you experienced in thinking through the
math problem above were just a matter of seeing or hearing the numbers in your “mind’s eye.”

3. See Galen Strawson, Mental Reality (MIT Press, 1994), Ch.1.
PHILOSOPHY OF MIND 41

