5.3 • Arguments

Getting to the Premises
The first step in understanding an argument is to identify the conclusion. Ask yourself what you think the main
point or main idea is. Can you identify a thesis? Sometimes identifying the conclusion may involve a little bit of
“mind reading.” You may have to ask yourself “What is this person trying to make me accept?” The arguer may
use words that indicate a conclusion—for example, “therefore” or “hence” (see Table 5.1). After you have
identified the conclusion, try to summarize it as well as you can. Then, identify the premises or evidence the
arguer offers in support of that conclusion. Once again, identifying reasons can be tricky and might involve
more mind reading because arguers don’t always explicitly state all of their reasons. Attempt to identify what
you think the arguer wants you to accept as evidence. Sometimes arguers also use words that indicate that
reasons or premises are being offered. In presenting evidence, people might use terms such as “because of” or
“since” (see Table 5.1). Lastly, if it is difficult to first identify the conclusion of an argument, you may have to
begin by parsing the evidence to then figure out the conclusion.

Conclusion indicator

therefore, hence, so, thus, consequently, accordingly, as a result, it follows that, it entails

words and phrases

that, we can conclude, for this reason, it must be that, it has to be that

Premise indicator
words and phrases

given that, since, because, for, in that, for the reason that, in as much as, as indicated by,
seeing how, seeing that, it follows from, owing to, it may be inferred from

TABLE 5.1 Navigating an Argument
Understanding evidence types can help you identify the premises being advanced for a conclusion. As
discussed earlier in the chapter, philosophers will often offer definitions or conceptual claims in their
arguments. For example, a premise may contain the conceptual claim that “The idea of God includes
perfection.” Arguments can also contain as premises empirical evidence or information about the world
gleaned through the senses. Principles are also used as premises in arguments. A principle is a general rule or
law. Principles are as varied as fields of study and can exist in any domain. For example, “Do not use people
merely as a means to an end” is an ethical principle.

CONNECTIONS
See the introduction to philosopher chapter to learn more about conceptual analysis.

The Difference between Truth and Logic
Analysis of arguments ought to take place on the levels of both truth and logic. Truth analysis is the
determination of whether statements are correct or accurate. On the other hand, logical analysis ascertains
whether the premises of an argument support the conclusion.
Often, people focus solely on the truth of an argument, but in philosophy logical analysis is often treated as
primary. One reason for this focus is that philosophy deals with subjects in which it is difficult to determine the
truth: the nature of reality, the existence of God, or the demands of morality. Philosophers use logic and
inference to get closer to the truth on these subjects, and they assume that an inconsistency in a position is
evidence against its truth.
Logical Analysis
Because logic is the study of reasoning, logical analysis involves assessing reasoning. Sometimes an argument
with a false conclusion uses good reasoning. Similarly, arguments with true conclusions can use terrible
reasoning. Consider the following absurd argument:

149

