RELIGION: THE INTERTWINING OF PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION IN WESTERN TRADITION | 37

The Stoics believed the universe was guided by divine Logos. While “Logos” in Greek Philosophy often
just means human reason or an argument, the word is also the Greek equivalent of the Hebrew “Davar” or
Aramaic “Memra,” (the divine “Word” of God) which, in the latter parts of the Hebrew Bible and in the
Targums (Aramaic translations or paraphrases of books of the Hebrew Bible), began taking on many of the
characteristics associated with God. (For example, in the Targums, it is the Memra who delivers the Israelites
from Egypt and makes a covenant with them, and so forth.) And although the Stoics are considered a school
of Greek Philosophy, the first Stoics happened to be Semitic immigrants from the East (Lightfoot 1894, 273,
299), so their view that the world is governed by a divine “Word” is especially noteworthy for its connection to
Jewish thought.
This term “Logos” later shows up in the Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria (c. 20 BCE-50 CE), who
describes the Logos as a kind of “second god,” the “first-born Son of God,” and the “eldest angel” (archangel)
(Philo 1993, 834; 247). Philo’s thoughts about the Logos show deep familiarity with both Plato and the Stoics.
Traces of this “Logos Theology” are to be found in Jewish Midrash as well (American-Israeli Cooperative
Enterprise, n.d.). It’s perhaps unsurprising that Philo shows familiarity with the philosophy of his day, being
from Alexandria, Egypt, one of the greatest centers of philosophical learning in the ancient world. The Gospel
of Matthew claims that Jesus also spent time in Egypt as a boy (Matthew 2:13-21), which, if true, would almost
certainly have been in Alexandria, where the vast majority of Jews living in Egypt at that time resided. This
would place Jesus in the same city as Philo at just the time Philo’s career there was flourishing. We also see Philo
of Alexandria’s term “Logos” playing an explicit, central role in a number of New Testament works, the most
famous being the prologue to the Gospel of John (1:1): “In the beginning was the Logos, and the Logos was
with God, and the Logos was God.” The term “Logos” has been described as a kind of bridge between Jewish
and Hellenistic thinking (Boyarin 2011, 546-549).
Numerous individual passages in the New Testament, as well as the entire epistle to the Hebrews, also show
influence on a number of points either directly from Philo or else some common source from which Philo
and the New Testament authors must both have been drawing (Siegert 2009, 175-209 passim; Runia 1993,
83, passim). For example, the author of Hebrews famously downplays the importance of the earthly temple in
Jerusalem in favor of a heavenly temple, of which the earthly temple is merely a “copy and shadow”:
[They] serve the copy and shadow of the heavenly things, as Moses was divinely instructed when he was about
to make the tabernacle. For He said, “See that you make all things according to the pattern shown you on the
mountain.” (Hebrews 8:5)

The talk about “copy and shadow” recalls Plato’s famous Analogy of the Cave in Book VII of the Republic,
where prisoners are chained up, facing a wall, unable to see anything except “the shadows of copies of things,”
which they mistake for the truth (514a-c ff.). The talk about making all things “according to the pattern” recalls
Plato’s discussion of the “craftsman” or “demiurge” (creator of the universe) in Timaeus (28a6). Likewise,
Hebrews 11:10 describes Abraham as searching for “the city having the foundations, whose artificer and
constructor [is] God,” where “constructor” is Plato’s term “demiurge” used for the creator in the Timaeus.

