12 An Introduction to Political Philosophy
a democratic constitution, and they alone, are morally justifiable. This type of political
philosophy is therefore essentially an application of moral philosophy to the political field.
And it is in this sense that the phrase 'political philosophy* appears to be generally understood; for when it is said, as it is often said in political journalism, that certain differences
of policy can be traced, in the end, to different "political philosophies*, it is obvious that
by different political philosophies is meant different assumptions about what it is right or
wrong to do in politics.
On the other hand, in the case of a few political philosophies—most notably those of
Machiavelli, Hobbes, and Bentham—a naturalistic conception of morality has been held,
and no attempt has therefore been made to justify government on moral grounds. The
justification offered has been conditional on the truth of an empirical assumption about
the object of government, which has usually been identified with the desire of the majority
of people. Thus Machiavelli believed that everyone desires strong and efficient government; Hobbes believed that everyone desires peace and security; and Bentham believed
that everyone desires happiness. None of these philosophers held that there is any objective
sense in which people ought to desire these ends; it is, they held, simply a fact that the large
majority of people or all people do desire them, and it is the function of the political philosopher to ascertain what type of political organization is most likely to achieve them. In
doing so he is, of course, acting as a political scientist rather than as a political philosopher,
for he is simply attempting to define the sort of political principles which must be observed
in order to achieve the end which most people are believed to desire, without pronouncing
in any way upon the moral worth of this end His function is therefore strictly analogous to
that of a medical officer of health applying scientific knowledge to promote the health of
those whom he serves. The strictly philosophical task of such a political philosopher ends
with his a priori demonstration that there is no moral reason why one end should be chosen
rather than another, and that the function of the politician is to devise the most effective
means for attaining the end which is generally desired.
It is, however, unusual for political philosophers to avoid making some assumption of
a moral character. For without such an assumption it is difficult to define the end of government in a sense that is not wholly arbitrary. If there is no reason why one end should
be chosen rather than another there is no reason why the desire of the majority should be
preferred to the desire of the minority or to the politician's own personal ambitions. Even
if Hobbes is justified in his assumption that everyone desires peace and personal security
above all things, there is no reason why a statesman should seek to realize these ends rather
than, for example, his own personal ambitions unless the former is morally better than the
latter. It is, indeed, possible to define the ends of government without moral assumptions
and in a way that is not wholly arbitrary if, and only if, everyone—both rulers and ruled—
desire the same ends. For in that case there can be no dispute about what ends are desired
And this does, indeed, seem to be an implicit assumption of the theories of Machiavelli and
Hobbes and Bentham. According to these theories the politician's only problem is to devise
the most effective means to the ends which everyone is assumed to desire.

