Biological laws and theories 55

only to females. Yet, depending on the current sex ratio, or other factors
such as sibling mating, at the times of birth they would have quite different
ﬁtnesses. Sometimes a better measure of ﬁtness is given by counting only
male offspring or female offspring or grand-offspring, or granddaughters or
grandsons. Sometimes the ﬁttest will be those who have fewer offspring in
a harsh season and more offspring in a lush one. Which will be the “right”
measure depends on the environment in which organisms ﬁnd themselves.
This may suggest that ﬁtness should be deﬁned as a relationship between
organisms and environments, not as a head count of offspring or descendants. In fact, one natural way of deﬁning ﬁtness invokes the notion of
environmental “design problems” mentioned in the ﬁrst chapter. Suppose
we view adaptation as the solution to metaphorical “design problems” set
by the environment (metaphorical because there is no literal designer, just
environmental changes and randomly produced variations that may or may
not enable the organism to survive in the face of these changes). Then x is
ﬁtter than y might be deﬁned as “x solves design problems posed by the environment better than y does.” This deﬁnition has some intuitive advantages
but many practical difﬁculties. Most of them are difﬁculties of applying the
deﬁnition, that is problems of converting the deﬁnition into measurements.
First, for a given design problem—e.g. camouﬂage, or keeping warm, or
ﬁghting parasites, or building nests—how do we tell which of two organisms
under comparison is better at solving the problem? One answer immediately
suggests itself: count offspring. But we already know that this answer is not
generally adequate. Second, given two organisms, each solving a different
design problem—say one solves the problem of staying warm while the other
solves the problem of ﬁnding water—how do we tell which solves its respective problem better? And how do we take into account what Olympic judging
rules call the “degree of difﬁculty” of each organism’s achievement? Suppose
one zebra is better at out-running lions and swatting away disease-bearing
ﬂies than another but the second is better at hiding from lions in the tall grass
and stores water better than the ﬁrst. Which is ﬁtter? Again, the only way to
solve this problem seems to be to count offspring. Third, how many “design
problems” do organisms face? It is very hard to count them up, so we cannot
even begin to deal with the problem of aggregating them into some overall
directly measurable deﬁnition of ﬁtness.
One conclusion to draw from this discussion is that deﬁnitions must be
distinguished from measurements, but a deﬁnition that does not easily lend
itself to measurement will not have much of a role in quantitative explanation and prediction. And one that cannot be measured at all cannot ﬁgure in
statements that are falsiﬁable. It is perfectly acceptable to change one’s measurement methods depending on the circumstances. Physicists and chemists
have a half-dozen or more different ways of measuring heat. But, in principle,
alternative measurement devices and units should all be measurements of the
same property, one that can be speciﬁed independently of them. That is our
problem here: What exactly is the relationship of “x is ﬁtter than y?” Fitness

