4. Temperatures are not rising
Notice that these four statements actually do have a natural ordering, in terms of “the
extent to which they agree with the current science”. Statement 1 is a close match,
statement 2 is a reasonable match, statement 3 isn’t a very good match, and statement
4 is in strong opposition to current science. So, in terms of the thing I’m interested in
(the extent to which people endorse the science), I can order the items as 1 > 2 > 3 >
4. Since this ordering exists, it would be very weird to list the options like this…
1. Temperatures are rising but not because of humans
2. Temperatures are rising because of human activity
3. Temperatures are not rising
4. Temperatures are rising but we don’t know why
…because it seems to violate the natural “structure” to the question.
So, let’s suppose I asked 100 people these questions, and got the answers shown in
Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Attitudes to climate change
Response

Number

(1) Temperatures are rising because
of human activity

51

(2) Temperatures are rising but we
do not know why

20

(3) Temperatures are rising but not
because of humans

10

(4) Temperatures are not rising

19

When analysing these data it seems quite reasonable to try to group (1), (2) and (3)
together, and say that 81 out of 100 people were willing to at least partially endorse the
science. And it’s also quite reasonable to group (2), (3) and (4) together and say that
49 out of 100 people registered at least some disagreement with the dominant scientific
view. However, it would be entirely bizarre to try to group (1), (2) and (4) together and
say that 90 out of 100 people said… what? There’s nothing sensible that allows you to
group those responses together at all.
That said, notice that while we can use the natural ordering of these items to construct
sensible groupings, what we can’t do is average them. For instance, in my simple example here, the “average” response to the question is 1.97. If you can tell me what that
means I’d love to know, because it seems like gibberish to me!

2.2.3

Interval scale

In contrast to nominal and ordinal scale variables, interval scale and ratio scale variables are variables for which the numerical value is genuinely meaningful. In the case
of interval scale variables the differences between the numbers are interpretable, but the
20

