66 Philosophy of Biology

hive—words that name structures in terms of their function—philosophers
have tried to render their teleology harmless. This enterprise has met with
resistance. Some of the resistance stems from the belief that biological functions cannot be cashed in for adaptations, as we need a prior concept of
function in order to express and assess claims about adaptation itself.

Adaptationism—for and against
Chapter 2 reported the debate about the unfalsiﬁability of the principle of
natural selection when ﬁtness is deﬁned in terms of reproductive success.
The practical problems arising from a deﬁnition of ﬁtness differences in
terms of alternative packages of design problem solutions also became apparent. Gould and Lewontin’s famous paper carries these criticisms further. It
deﬁnes “adaptationism” as the research program in biology which “regards
natural selection as so powerful and the constraints upon it as so few that
direct production of adaptation through its operation becomes the primary
cause of nearly all organic form, function and behavior” (Gould and Lewontin
1979: 584). Adaptationism begins by “atomizing” organism into separate
traits, and then seeks the design problem that each of these traits optimally
solves. When it fails to show the optimality of a trait with respect to a single
design problem, adaptationism seeks conﬂicting design problems which the
organism’s lineage faced and which favored these suboptimal traits as “tradeoffs” in an optimal package. This is where Dr. Pangloss and Panglossianism
emerge. The eighteenth century philosopher Voltaire introduced Pangloss as
a caricature of Leibniz, the German philosopher who held that everything
has a function, a role to play in making this the best of all possible worlds.
Thus, for example, Dr. Pangloss explained the existence of the bridge of the
nose on humans as owing to its function in supporting eyeglasses. One problem here is that the bridge of the nose is not a separate trait, in the sense that
it was never acted upon by natural selection. The nose as a whole perhaps is
a trait but, even if so, the bridge is nothing more than an arbitrary aspect of
it. Another problem is that eyeglasses came long after nose bridges so could
not be part of their cause. More generally, Gould and Lewontin argued, it
is impossible to tell just by looking at a few generations whether a particular feature of an organism is an adaptive trait. Such speculations, based on
“reverse engineering” of function and plausible selective histories, are not
science; they are “just so” stories. (Readers may recall Rudyard Kipling’s
Just So Stories—fables about how the camel got its hump, how the elephant
got its trunk, how the leopard got its spots, etc.) What has this to do with
“spandrels?” As Gould and Lewontin tell us, spandrels are the curved triangular areas in the raised corners of the square structure supporting the
central dome in cathedrals like the Basilica of San Marco. They are typically
decorated with mosaic religious iconography, often well integrated into the
much larger mosaics of the dome itself. The mistaken treatment of traits
not actually selected for as adaptations is likened by Gould and Lewontin

