Cognitive Theory of Dialectical Materialism

207

Annotation 212 (continued)

Scientific experimental activity has the purpose of expanding our understanding of
nature and human society, which leads directly to historical-social development in
a variety of ways. For example, improving our scientific understanding of medicine
through scientific experimental activity leads to longer lives and improved quality of
life. Improving our scientific understanding of chemistry through scientific experimental activity leads to all sorts of materials which improve the quality of life and enable
human beings to solve a variety of social problems.
In order to qualify as praxis activity, a given human activity must have a purpose
and it must have historical-social characteristics. For instance, drawing is not always
praxis in the sense of the word used in this text, but it would be praxis if it would
qualify as material production activity (i.e., making art in order to sell, so as to make a
living) or if the art is made with the intention of invoking social change.
Every basic praxis activity form has an important function, and these functions are not
interchangeable with each other. However, they have close relationships with each other
and different praxis activity forms often interact with each other. In these relationships,
material production is the most important form of praxis activity, playing a decisive role
in determining other praxis activities because material production is the most primitive
activity and exists most commonly in human life. Material production creates the most
essential, decisive material conditions for human survival and development. Without
material production there cannot be other praxis activities. After all, all other praxis
activities arise from material production praxis and all praxis activities ultimately aim to
serve material production praxis.
Annotation 213

Without material production activity, human beings would not be able to live at all.
Thus, material production activities make all other forms of human activities possible.
In addition, the primary reason we participate in socio-political activity is to ensure
material security (food, water, shelter, etc.) for members of society, which ultimately
relies on material production activity. Therefore, the primary reason we engage in
scientific experimental activity is to improve material production activities in terms of
efficiency, yield, effectiveness, etc
Of course, we engage in scientific experimental activity and material production activity for other reasons (art, entertainment, recreation, etc.), but these activities require
that material security be secured first for those participating in the production and
consumption of such products. In other words, material production activity is a prerequisite for all other forms of activity, since without some measure of material security humans cannot survive.

