(1) The specification of some non-empty set, written George satisfies “Gx” on this interpretation, but one
|M| to serve as the domain of quantification mapping “x” to Ringo will not. The same variable
for the language.
assignment that satisfies “Gx” might not satisfy
This set is the sum total of entities the quanti- “Gy” if it maps “y” to Ringo.
fiers are interpreted to “range over”.
variable assign(2) A function assigning, for each constant in the Definition: The value of term 𝑡 for M
ment
𝑠
for
structure
M,
written
Val
𝑠 (𝑡), is defined
language, some fixed member of |M| for which
recursively as follows:
it is taken to stand.
M
M
For a given constant 𝑐, this member is denoted (1) If 𝑡 is a constant 𝑐, then Val𝑠M (𝑡) is 𝑐 ;
(2) if 𝑡 is a variable 𝑥, then Val𝑠 (𝑡) is 𝑠(𝑥);
in the metalanguage by 𝑐 M .
function term 𝑓 (𝑡1 , … , 𝑡𝑛 ), then ValM
𝑠 (𝑡) is
(3) A function assigning, for each predicate 𝐹 with (3) ifM𝑡 is a M
M
𝑓
(Val
(𝑡
),
…
,
Val
(𝑡
)),
i.e.,
the
value
of the
1
𝑛
𝑠
𝑠
superscript 𝑛 in the language, some subset of
function assigned to 𝑓 in the structure for the
|M|𝑛 , written 𝐹 M .
values of the argument terms as arguments.
That is, the structure assigns to each predicate
a set of 𝑛-tuples from |M|, its “extension”.
Definition: The notion of a variable assignment 𝑠
(4) An assignment, for each function letter 𝑓 with
in structure M satisfying a given formula 𝜑, writsuperscript 𝑛 in the language, some 𝑛-place opten M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜑, is defined recursively. For a given
eration on |M|, written 𝑓 M .
variable assignment 𝑠 in structure M:
(i) M, 𝑠 ⊨ ⊤, always holds; M, 𝑠 ⊨ ⊥ never holds.
You can take “interpretation” here pretty literally;
(We can write this as M, 𝑠 ⊭ ⊥.)
a structure is basically an assignment of a universe
I.e., ⊤ and ⊥ are, respectively, satisfied by
of discourse to the quantifiers, and an appropriate
every assignment for every structure, and
semantic value to each non-logical constant of the
satisfied by no assignment for any structure.
language.

Variable assignments and satisfaction
Definition: A variable assignment, 𝑠, for interpretation M, is a function that maps every variable
of the language of M to a member of |M|.
There can be (and unless M has only a single
member always are) many different variable assignments for any given structure.
E.g., if |M| is {John, Paul, George, Ringo}, then
there is one that maps every variable to John, one
that maps every variable to Ringo, one that maps
“x” to John and the rest to Ringo, etc.
Suppose we have an open formula, “Gx”, meaning, e.g., “x is a guitarist”. A given interpretation
(structure)—such as the one that makes GM the set
{John, George}—does not say that this is true or
false, because it depends on “x”. But we say the
formula is satisfied when “x” is assigned to George.
Technically, we make satisfaction a relationship
between a variable assignment and a formula (open
or closed). A variable assignment mapping “x” to
10

(ii) If 𝜑 is an atomic wff of the form 𝐹 (𝑡1 , … , 𝑡𝑛 ),
M
then M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜑 iff ⟨ValM
𝑠 (𝑡1 ), … , Val𝑠 (𝑡𝑛 )⟩ ∈
𝐹 M.
I.e., atomic wffs are satisfied when the values
of their terms on the assignment are members
of the extension the structure assigns to the
predicate.
(iii) If 𝜑 is of the form ¬𝜓 , then M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜑 iff M, 𝑠 ⊭
𝜓.
I.e., an assignment satisfies a negation just in
case it does not satisfy what it negates.
(iv) If 𝜑 is of the form 𝜓 ∨ 𝜃, then M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜑 iff
either M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜓 or M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜃.
I.e., an assignment satisfies a disjunction iff
it satisfies either of the two disjuncts.
(v) If 𝜑 is of the form 𝜓 ∧ 𝜃, then M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜑 iff both
M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜓 and M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜃.
I.e., an assignment satisfies a conjunction iff
it satisfies both conjuncts.
(vi) If 𝜑 is of the form 𝜓 → 𝜃, then M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜑 iff
either M, 𝑠 ⊭ 𝜓 or M, 𝑠 ⊨ 𝜃.

