AESTHETICS: ENGAGING WITH INDIGENOUS ART | 61

do not want the War Gods gazed upon. These norms of behavior establish culturally specific protocols for how
people should relate to those objects.
It follows that another aspect of appreciation in cross-cultural settings is an acknowledgment of the
normative aspects of behavior that follow from the metaphysical aspects of the symbol, as religious traditions
involve norms about how an object may be produced, as well as how the symbol should be treated. This
involves the imaginative interpretation of the metaphysics of art (Coleman 2008). For example, in the tradition
of icon painting, Europeans understand that the Platonic background to these ideas informs how it is engaged
with. There are some aspects of many Indigenous claims and Platonic thought that appear to be similar. One is
the association of the object with what it represents in such a way that it makes little sense to say that something
is “a representation.” Similarly, when some Maori see images of their ancestors, they do not view or respond to
the image as a representation but respond to the image by greeting the ancestors. In making such imaginative
connections between metaphysical systems, non-Indigenous people may stretch their boundaries, expanding
their categories of art, as well as how they engage with it.
The philosopher Thomas Heyd suggests that etiquette is a first step in the creation of a cross-cultural ethic
that establishes a mode of approach that respects other cultural values (Heyd 2007). Heyd develops his idea
of cross-cultural appreciation from the concept of civility in conversation. Civility involves distancing oneself
from one’s own concerns to appreciate things from other points of view. Moreover, civility displays goodwill
in the participants of an interaction even in the absence of agreement about other values, as well as a respectful
attitude towards differences. In relation to the aesthetic appreciation of those goods, etiquette implies “seeking
out the aesthetic and artistic perspectives that may have contributed to the manifestations in question, and at
the same time taking note that … we need to be cautious in our judgment as to the significance of the values
found” (Heyd 2007, 196). Such an approach, he thinks, would have the consequence that the value of cultural
goods would be more likely to be understood, and they would be less likely to be misappropriated.
This idea of etiquette may be developed in terms of the observance of the protocols surrounding an
object’s use (Coleman 2018). The first and most important aspect of this engagement involves attention to
the protocols that accompany an object in the society that produced it. This may involve changing how we
approach works in a gallery setting. For instance, in the Auckland Art Gallery Toi o Tāmaki in New Zealand,
one of the first exhibits on entering is a Maori meeting house with carvings of the spiritual Ancestors. Visitors
are required to remove their shoes before entering the space as a gesture of respect. Yet note, this is not a simple
engagement as though participants were visitors to new lands in past times. Rather, it is an active negotiation
between contemporary participants. The meaning of the ritual, and the way in which respect is interpreted, are
negotiated within a new context.
The expansion of boundaries and categories in a fusion of horizons is not a one-way process. Remote
Indigenous artists often travel to cities for exhibitions and have some sense of what galleries are and how they
function. They produce work specifically for the gallery. Indeed, the Indigenous people’s negotiation with the
secret sacred in the gallery context has been a spur to the creation of works of great beauty. Howard Morphy
points out that the emphasis on dotting in Central Desert art occurs as part of a second wave of painting:

