SOCIAL CHOICES
genstern utility functions, one might wonder why anyone would think it a
reasonable condition to place on SWFs. Yet there are major conceptual and
practical obstacles to using additional alternatives when ranking a single pair —
whether the extra ones are deemed relevant or not. Take, for instance, the
method of counting the number of alternatives located between two alternatives
as a means of measuring preference intensities, which in turn could be used to
decide whose preferences to favor. Can we conclude from table 6-8 that Jones’s
preference for coffee over tea is more intense than Smith’s for tea over coffee?
Jones ranks many beverages between coffee and tea, but perhaps steps down his
ranking indicate only slight changes in preference whereas steps down Smith’s
indicate great changes. In that case Smith might prefer tea to coffee much more
than Jones prefers coffee to tea. But how are we to tell? And if we could tell,
would it be just or fair to take such preference intensities into account? What
if the introduction of “really" irrelevant alternatives such as preferences for
clothes, movies, or books put their preferences for coffee and tea in a new light?
And what is really irrelevant anyway? Such questions raise difficult issues that
must be faced by anyone using many of the methods that do not satisfy condition
I. This is not to say that it is impossible to deal with them satisfactorily. How¬
ever, they show that, other things being equal, an SWF satisfying condition I
is preferable. Thus it was reasonable for Arrow to include it on his list of con¬
ditions.
We can now prove the implication that we set aside until the discussion
of condition I had been completed. This is done in the following lemma.
the pareto lemma. Any SWF that satisfies conditions PA, CS, and I also
satisfies condition P.
proof. Assume that the SWF satisfies conditions PA, CS, and I. Next as¬
sume that P i is a profile in which every citizen ranks alternative x above
another, y. To establish that condition P is met we must show that the
SWF yields a social ordering for Pi in which x is ranked above y. Since
condition I is in force we can restrict our attention to just the alternatives
x and y. Any social ordering of x and y determined by considering just
their respective places in a profile cut down to just these two alternatives
must hold for all larger profiles containing it. We will suppose for Pi the
SWF does not socially rank a above y and derive a contradiction. Then
there must be some profile Pi different from P i for which the SWF so¬
cially ranks a above y, because CS is in force. Furthermore, Pi and Pi
must differ in their placement of x and y. Thus some citizens in Pi do not
prefer x to y. Yet the placement of x and y in Pi can be obtained from
that of Pi by moving x up in the ranking of one or more citizens. Hence
by PA, the social ordering for it must rank x above y. But then by condi¬
tion I, the social ordering for Pi must also rank x above y. And that con¬
tradicts the assumption that the SWF failed to socially order a above y
for Pi.

185

