The Political Theories of the Sophists 21
second interpretation is probably correct, and that his theory is therefore not a naturalistic
one; but in either case the inference from what does happen to what ought to happen is
necessarily fallacious.
Thmsymachus
Whether or not Callicles* theory was naturalistic, there can be no doubt that the views
attributed to Thrasymachus by Plato in the Republic are completely naturalistic. Thrasymachus was another Sophist of the latefifthcentury B.C., and he is introduced in Book I
of the Republic as a supporter of the theory that "just or right means nothing but what is
to the interest of the stronger party." The subsequent discussion makes it clear that by this
he meant that whatever the strongest individual or group in a community does in pursuit
of his or their interest defines what is meant by "right action*. There neither is nor can be
any conflict between what the 'sovereign' power in a community does and what that community recognizes to be right since the actions of the sovereign power, or the actions which
it approves, are what is meant by right actions. Minority groups may, indeed, challenge this
conception of right actions, but their alternative conception cannot be effective unless and
until they can compel the majority to accept it
Plato examines this theory in some detail in the Republic, and advances, through the
mouth of Socrates, a number of arguments which he obviously regards as a conclusive
refutation. Thus Socrates argues (a) that strong men are not in fact motivated simply by a
desire to exploit their strength. By a form of argument which Plato frequently employed,
Socrates contends that the strong man or ruler is a sort of craftsman, skilled in the art of
government, and that this art, like the art of the physician or the ship's captain, must, to
achieve its ends, care for the welfare of those who constitute its raw material. Just as the
physician tries to treat his patients successfully and the ship's captain tries to sail his ship
with skill, so, Socrates argues, the ruler inevitably cares for the good of his subjects and
will not therefore be interested solely in dominating them. As Socrates puts it, (No form of
skill or authority provides for its own benefit, it always studies and prescribes what is good
for its subject—the interest of the weaker party.*2
(b) Socrates also compares the art of governing to the tuning of a musical instrument,
and argues that, just as the musician will fail to tune his instrument properly if he goes
beyond a certain pitch, so the ruler can pass beyond the limit which will give him the maximum power which he is capable of achieving.3
(c) Finally, Socrates argues that everything has a proper and characteristic function, that
function being the work 'for which that thing is the only instrument or the best*.1 Thus the
function of a man's soul is not the uncontrolled gratification of desire, which is characteristic of the lower animals, but the exercise of those functions which man alone can perform,
such as deliberating and subordinating his instinctive desires to rational principles of conduct If a man does behave as if he were a mere physical force or an unreasoning animal
1
2
1

1

Republic, 1,337 (translation by F.M.Comford).
ibid., 1,346.
A modern illustration of this principle is the fate of Hitler after his refusal to accept the settlement
reached at the Munich Conference in October, 1938, and in ultimately losing all his power by
placing no limit to his ambitions.
Republic, I, 352.

