12.4 Iterated Games

strategy, they will achieve outcomes that are much better than those
achieved by players always playing the dominant, noncooperative strategy.
Furthermore, the tit-for-tat strategy can be modified in various ways, by
introducing probabilistic conditions. For example, in real life it would make
sense to introduce a condition that prevents a player from always playing
a noncooperative strategy if the opponent failed to cooperate. Perhaps the
opponent accidentally made a mistake, without having any intention of not
trying to cooperate. (This is sometimes called the “trembling hand” hypothesis.) Hence, even if the opponent did not cooperate and you are playing tit
for tat, it might be wise to modify your strategy such that the probability
that you cooperate against a noncooperative player is not equal to zero.
Perhaps you should give him a ten percent chance to show that he actually
prefers to cooperate and that his previous move was caused by an unintentional mistake.
In order to further clarify how indefinitely iterated prisoner’s dilemmas
differ from the finitely iterated version of the game, it is helpful to consider
a numerical example. In order to keep the example as simple as possible, we
shall make the somewhat unrealistic assumption that both players play the
grim trigger strategy, and that this is common knowledge. The grim trigger
strategy is a version of tit for tat in which each player cooperates in the
initial round of the game, as well as in every future round, as long as the
other player also cooperates. However, as soon as the other player defects,
the player will defect in all future rounds of the game, no matter what the
other players does. The upshot of this is that a noncooperative move will
never be forgiven.
Under what conditions is it rational for players playing the grim trigger
strategy to cooperate? Utility is measured on an interval scale, so without
loss of generality we can set the utility of the outcome in which both players
do not cooperate to zero. To make sure that the game is a prisoner’s
dilemma, we stipulate that A > B > 0 > D.

Table 12.6
C1: Cooperate

C2: Do not

R1: Cooperate

B,

B

D,

A

R2: Do not

A,

D

0,

0

277

