58 | AESTHETICS: ENGAGING WITH INDIGENOUS ART

Aboriginal paintings, as these became produced for sale as art objects (Coleman 2001). Critics were concerned
that the paintings, produced in acrylics, could not be authentic given that they were not produced for
ceremonial purposes or with traditional media. However, what cannot be “seen” in the artworks is their
ontological structure.7 We might discuss artworks as either “allographic,” that is, as having a symbolic structure
like words, which can be repeated and produced in different media and yet always remain the same word,
or “autographic,” meaning a single system produced by a specific author, like a painting. So, for example,
the notation system of symbols and words means that any book with the same sequence of letters is an
instance of the same book. There can be any number of instances of a performance of a play, and each
interpretation can be quite different and have different aesthetic qualities while remaining the same play.
However, a painting of sunflowers by Vincent Van Gogh is always a single and distinct painting, even though
Van Gogh painted sunflowers many times. Aboriginal paintings are different from Western paintings in that
they have instructions for correct performance, like plays or music. Accordingly, an Aboriginal painting
can be reinterpreted in different contexts, and different mediums, because it is not autographic. Different
interpretations are instances of the same work, regardless of the medium in which they are produced.
Those unfamiliar with the culture should not assume that they can always identify the skill or the aesthetic
properties that make a work valuable or good from the perspective of an Indigenous person from that culture.
Some properties, such as the messiness of paint, may be less important than the density of the color, and
the sensory qualities of value may differ even in closely related societies. The meaning of the object we are
attempting to appreciate may only be given in ceremonial contexts. Nor can non-Indigenous peoples assume
that only certain kinds of work are authentic. Indigenous arts may have a very different ontological structure,
and this ontology will make a difference between what counts as an authentic instance of an artwork produced
within a tradition. However, it is important to avoid essentializing Indigenous arts to those artifacts produced
for ceremonial or religious contexts. Indigenous peoples may also produce artifacts for purely aesthetic reasons
to be used domestically or sold within a cross-cultural arts market. Developments within those traditions make
it possible for artists to modify works within cultural protocols, retaining cultural authenticity, as objects
created within those traditions.
European tastes and current aesthetic standards potentially blind them to an acknowledgment of the
achievements of other people. If Europeans attempt to understand works of art from their own perspective,
they impose their own standards of taste and learn nothing. As with the Rembrannga didgeridoo, they
cannot see the quality of color because they are looking at the messiness. Similarly, the music of the Kaluli
tribe of Papua New Guinea was dismissed as unmusical by missionaries because it was structured to involve
overlapping voices rather than harmony. People cannot make relevant aesthetic judgments based solely on
what they perceive—that is, how an artwork looks or sounds (Higgins 2005, 2). They need information and
categories that make the art’s properties relevant as points of comparison (Walton 1970). If the Quai Branly

7. By “ontological structure,” I refer to the structure of something that makes it an instance of that thing.

