DECISIONS UNDER RISK: UTILITY
from each other by means of order-preserving (ordinal) transformations. Two
interval scales will count as equivalent if and only if they can be obtained from
each other by means of positive linear transformations.
Another type of scale with which you are familiar is ratio scales. We use
these for measuring lengths (in yards, feet, meters) or weights (in pounds,
grams, ounces). The scales all share two important features: First, they all have
natural zero points (no length, no speed, no weight), and second, the scales are
used to represent the ratio of a thing measured to some standard unit of measure¬
ment. (Something 10 yards long bears the ratio of 10 to 1 to a standard yardstick;
the latter can be laid off ten times against the former.) In converting from one
ratio scale to another we multiply by a positive constant. (Thus, to obtain inches
from feet we multiply by 12.) This turns out to be the equivalence condition for
ratio scales: Two ratio scales are equivalent to each other if and only if they may
be obtained from each other by multiplying by positive constants. This is a spe¬
cial case of a positive linear transformation; thus ratio scales are a tighter kind
of interval scale.
One way to appreciate the difference between ratio and interval scales is
to think of changing scales in terms of changing the labels on our measuring in¬
struments. If we had a measuring rod 9 feet long, labeled in feet, and relabeled
it in yards, we would need fewer marks on the stick. If we labeled it in inches
we would need more marks. But in either case the zero point would remain the
same. This is not necessarily so with interval scales. If we had a thermometer
marked in degrees Fahrenheit and changed it to degrees Celsius, we would use
fewer marks (between the freezing and boiling points of water there are 100 Cel¬
sius units in contrast to 180 Fahrenheit units), and we would also shift the zero
point upward. Because there is no fixed zero point on our temperature scales,
we must be quite careful when we say that something is twice as hot as some¬
thing else. Suppose that at noon yesterday, the outdoor temperature was at the
freezing point of water and that today at noon it measured 64 degrees on the
Fahrenheit scale. Was it twice as hot today at noon as it was yesterday? On the
Fahrenheit scale, yes, but not on the Celsius scale. Suppose, for contrast, that
I am driving at 60 miles per hour and you are driving at 30. Now convert our
speeds to kilometers per hour. You will see that I would still be driving twice
as fast as you.
Since we will use interval scales rather than ratio scales to represent
preference intervals, we cannot assume that arithmetic operations that we per¬
form freely on speeds, weights, or distances make sense for utilities. I will re¬
turn to this point later.
We have already seen that decisions under risk require more than ordinal
scales. Will interval scales suffice? Or must we move on to ratio scales? No, we
need not, for any two scales that are positive linear transformations of each
other will produce the same ranking of acts in a decision table and, thus, will
yield the same decisions. In short, interval scales suffice for decisions under
risk. Let us now prove this.
Let table 4-3 represent any decision table and any two acts in it. I will call
83

