42

An Introduction to Metaphysics

to be determined by the probabilities, nor by any facts about the putative
causes or the effect, nor by any causal chains between them.23 Since both
possibilities seem equally good, for the moment, let’s just suppose that it
was Merlin who beat the 50:50 odds; it was his spell that worked. We’ll
also suppose that Morgana’s didn’t beat those odds; it lost out. As before, it
turns out that Morgana casting her spell stands in probabilistic relations
that often accompany a causal connection: her casting the spell raised the
conditional probability of the prince turning into a frog, and, if she hadn’t
cast her spell, the probability of the prince turning into a frog would
have been much less. Probability Raising and Probabilistic Counterfactual
Dependence don’t permit the result that only Merlin’s spell worked, even
though that seems to be a genuine possibility.
This case of underdetermination, a case of complete overlap, is potentially a serious challenge to the possibility of an account of causation. In
the partial overlap case there was the fact that the king turned into the
frog that made it clear that it was Merlin’s spell, not Morgana’s, that was
effect­ive. The presence of that fact gives some hope to those who want
to provide an account of causation. There is at least a symptom indicating that there might be some underlying truthmaker for the causal facts.
Lewis shows the following flicker of hope:
We want to say that the raising that counts is the raising of the
probability of the causal chain of events and absences whereby the
effect was actually caused. Raising the probability of some unactualized
alternative causal chain leading to the same effect doesn’t count. But it
would be circular to say it that way within an analysis of causation. I hope
there is some non-circular way to say much the same thing, but I have
none to offer.24

The complete overlap case appears to dash that hope. Nothing in the example suggests that there is any fact that might serve as a truthmaker for the
claim that Merlin was the cause.

23 We are setting aside the possibility that both spells worked. That seems fair since

we could have built into the case that, in an appropriate number of cases when
two spells are cast at exactly the same target, the target turns into a frog that
is twice as green and twice as small as someone who is the victim of a one-spell
transmogrification.
24	David Lewis, “Causation as Influence,” pp. 79–80.

