1. A good argument is logically well-framed. This is the minimum requirement: the premises of a good
argument offer reasons for the conclusion. However, different individuals can have different ideas about
what counts as a good reason or not—good reasons for one person can be inadequate for another. So,
while necessary, this requirement isn’t sufficient.
2. As there may be disagreement about the premises, a good argument starts from acceptable premises, or
premises that are warranted, and not only for the reasoner, but mainly for the audience. Of course, even
though not true or plausible at all, certain premises may be acceptable, depending on the audience or
even on the function of the argument in a given context. Considerations of form and content necessarily
have to be taken together then.
3. The premises must contain relevant information for the conclusion—if not all that is relevant, at least
enough to make the conclusion acceptable. Concealing relevant information is a well-known form of
deceiving people, just as taking certain information for granted when it has been widely contested is a
mistake.
Fallacies contain errors in one or more of the senses given above. Of course, there are uncountable reasons for
accepting a conclusion, such as social, cultural, and psychological reasons. However, the criteria for identifying
good arguments are nevertheless logical criteria—that is, they are rational criteria, publicly open to evaluation.
So, anyone could identify fallacies by paying attention to the following:
1. Do the premises support the conclusion, or only offer very weak support for the conclusion?
2. Are the premises well-supported?
3. Do the argument’s premises include all the important relevant information?
To avoid being fallacious, an argument must be able to answer all of these questions in the positive. Bearing this
in mind, we do not need to attempt to provide an exhaustive list of each and every possible fallacy. All we must do
is learn how to identify when and how those criteria are not met, so we can understand when and how arguments
fail to be good. So, let us examine a taxonomy of fallacies, that is, how they are classified, and then a list of some
common fallacies.
TAXONOMY OF FALLACIES
Our taxonomy of fallacies aims to categorise fallacies into distinct groups, highlighting the distinctive problems
that members of each group possess. Our most general division is the above mentioned distinction between formal
and informal fallacies. As mistakes in the form of deductive arguments have already been covered in Chapter 3,
in this chapter we focus on mistakes of the second kind: informal fallacies.
Informal fallacies are so called because their errors lie not in their logical form. Instead, to appreciate what is
wrong with them, we must look at the argument’s content, and thus we must examine if the reasoning within the
argument meets our other criteria presented above—relevant information and acceptable premises. Such informal
fallacies are normally divided into the following three general categories (Kahane and Tidman 2002, 349):
1. Relevance fallacies: Fallacies of this kind do not present relevant information, or present irrelevant
information for the conclusion.
2. Ambiguity fallacies: Such fallacies employ unclear or equivocal terms or propositions, so that it becomes
LOGIC 37

