96

5 attitude exp ression in iro n y

I just stated, all the theories appear to agree that irony is at least
typically negative. What I am questioning is whether there really are
instances of positive irony that would create an imbalance.
The main reason why most pragmatic theories claim that irony is
typically but not always negative is the assumption that there are
certain cases that are ironic even if the speaker expresses a positive
attitude. These cases are scarcer than traditional negative irony, but
they exist – or so they claim. A detailed analysis of the allegedly
positive instances of irony is in order, and I will proceed with such
in the following two subsections.
5.2.1

False Positives

Among examples (37)–(41) that I have presented as candidates for
positive irony, there are several differences. The first two cases illustrate examples of irony that follow the same pattern as typically
known cases of negative irony, with the only apparent difference
being that now the speaker appears to blame while actually intending
to praise. This similarity is most obvious in example (37), which is
evidently the reverse case of Sperber and Wilson’s picnic example:
Nancy and her friend Jane were planning a trip to the beach. ‘It’s
probably going to rain tomorrow’ said Jane, who was always trying,
with little success, to predict the weather. The next day was a warm
and sunny one. As she looked out the window, Nancy said:
(37) This certainly is awful weather.
(Kreuz & Glucksberg 1989: 377)
p e t e r : It’s a lovely day for a picnic.
They go for a picnic and it rains.
m a r y (sarcastically):
(15) It’s a lovely day for a picnic, indeed.
(Sperber & Wilson 1986/95: 239)

The second scene exemplifies a traditional instance of negative irony:
Mary apparently says that it is beautiful weather, but she actually communicates through irony that it is cold and stormy, awful weather for
a picnic. In contrast, the first scene would be an example of so-called
positive irony: Nancy apparently complains or regrets that the weather is
awful while she ironically communicates that the weather is warm and

