28

JERRY FODOR

as we saw, we are left with networks of belief as the bearers or determinants of understanding . . . (p. 13).
. . a child's initial (stimulus-response) use of, say, 'white' as a response to the familiar kind of sensation, provides that term with no
semantic identity. It acquires a semantic identity as, and only as, it
comes to figure in a network of beliefs and a correlative pattern of
inferences. Depending on what that acquired network happens to be,
that term could come to mean white or hot . . ., or an infinity of
other things (14).
And so forth. So Churchland holds, on holistic grounds, that an observation sentence might mean anything depending upon theoretical context.
I emphasize that this conclusion is equivalent to the claim that anything
might be an observation sentence depending upon theoretical context; or,
material mode, that anything might be observed depending upon theoretical context. For Churchland-as, of course, for many other philosophers-you can change your observational capacities by changing your
theories. Indeed, Churchland sees in this a program for educational reform. "If our perceptual judgements must be laden with theory in any
case, then why not exchange the Neolithic legacy now in use for the
conception of reality embodied in modern-era science?" (p. 35). Really
well brought up children would not
. . . sit on the beach and listen to the steady roar of the pounding
surf. They sit on the beach and listen to the aperiodic atmospheric
compression waves produced as the coherent energy of the ocean
waves is audibly redistributed in the chaotic turbulence of the shallows. . . . They do not observe the western sky redden as the Sun
sets. They observe the wavelength distribution of incoming solar radiation shift towards the longer wavelengths . . . as the shorter are
increasingly scattered away from the lengthening atmospheric path
that they must take as terrestrialrotation turns us slowly away from
their source. . . They do not feel common objects grow cooler with
the onset of darkness, nor observe the dew forming on every surface.
They feel the molecular KE of common aggregates dwindle with the
now uncompensated radiation of their energy starwards, and they observe the accretionof reassociatedatmosphericH20 molecules as their
KE is lost to the now more quiescent aggregates with which they
collide . . . (p. 30).
Oh brave new world/that has such children in it.

This content downloaded from 154.059.124.102 on September 17, 2016 21:26:35 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

