42

JERRYFODOR

things in x, but interpretthem differently. It does not explain controversy
in research science" (Hanson 1961, p. 13). (In Hanson's text, the second
sentence appearsas a footnote at the point where I have inserted it.) Now,
on the view of science that Granny and I hold to, this is worse than the
wrong answer; it's the answer to the wrong question. It is no particular
puzzle, given the nondemonstrative characterof empirical inference, that
there should be scientific controversy. Rather, as the skeptical tradition
in philosophy has made crystal clear, the epistemological problem par
excellence is to explain scientific consensus; to explain how it is possible,
given the vast and notorious underdeterminationof theory by data, that
scientists should agree about so much so much of the time.
What Granny and I think is that part of the story about scientific consensus turns crucially on the theory-neutralityof observation. Because the
way one sees the world is largely independent of one's theoretical attachments, it is possible to see that the predictions-even of theories that
one likes a lot-aren't coming out. Because the way one sees the world
is largely independent of one's theoretical attachments, it is often possible
for scientists whose theoretical attachments differ to agree on what experimentswould be relevant to deciding between their views, and to agree
on how to describe the outcomes of the experiments once they've been
run. We admit, Granny and I do, that working scientists indulge in every
conceivable form of fudging, smoothing over, brow beating, false advertising, self-deception, and outright rat painting-all the intellectual ills
that flesh is heir to. It is, indeed, a main moral of this paper that, in many
importantways, scientists are a lot like us. Nevertheless, it is perfectly
obviously true that scientific observations often turn up unexpected and
unwelcome facts, that experiments often fail and are often seen to do so,
in shortthat what scientists observe isn't determinedsolely, or even largely,
by the theories that they endorse, still less by the hopes that they cherish.
It's these facts that the theory neutrality of observation allows us to explain.
The thing is: if you don't think that theory neutral observation can settle
scientific disputes, you're likely to think that they are settled by appeals
to coherence, or convention or-worse yet-by mere consensus. And
Granny-who is a Realist down to her tennis sneakers-doesn't see how
any of those could compel rational belief. Granny and I have become
pretty hardened, in our respective old ages; but we're both still moved
by the idea that belief in the best science is rational because it is objective,
and that it is objective because the predictions of our best theories can
be observed to be true. I'm less adamant than Granny is, but I don't find
the argumentsagainst the theory neutrality of observation persuasive, and
I think that the theory neutrality of observation is a doctrine that Realists
have got to hold onto. "Help stamp out creeping pluralism", Granny says;

This content downloaded from 154.059.124.102 on September 17, 2016 21:26:35 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

