Sellars’ “Rylean Myth” 195
concepts. If so, the mental is as open to intersubjective empirical investigation as any other realm within the empirical world. Furthermore, if our
concepts of the mental are empirical concepts acquired via theory postulation, like the concepts of unobservable micro-objects postulated in the
natural sciences, then there is little reason to think that they apply to objects
of an entirely different kind from other natural objects. This removes a
motivation for Cartesian dualism.
Sellars’ approach to mentalistic concepts has been important for cognitive science, for it legitimates a naturalistic approach to the mind that
nonetheless respects the internality of mental states. Indeed, it inspired the
“theory theory” approach to folk psychology, a research program in cognitive science that develops the idea that in early childhood people acquire
and learn to apply a theory-like conceptual structure that enables them to
interpret the behavior of other people (see Perner and Wellman).
Sellars’ argument takes the form of a thought experiment. He asks us to
imagine a community that lacks concepts of inner psychological states,
although it possesses a complex language for describing and explaining
objects and events in the world. This community also possesses a behaviorist’s ability to describe and to explain human behavior, as well as metalinguistic abilities to describe and to prescribe linguistic behavior. Such a
community, Sellars then argues, can reasonably increase its explanatory
resources by extending its language/conceptual system by postulating unobservable states internal to each person. Further, there is a motive to postulate
two different kinds of internal states: one kind – thoughts – has properties
modeled on the semantic properties of overt linguistic events, while the
other – sense impressions – has properties modeled on the properties of
perceptible objects. If Sellars’ story is coherent, then the traditional view
that our concepts and knowledge of the mental is simply given is not
compulsory.
The principal objections to Sellars’ Rylean Myth have been that the situation described in his thought experiment is either incoherent (Marras) or
so empirically implausible as to be unworthy of serious consideration
(Chisholm, Triplett). Could there really be people who have a rich physical
language as well as a metalanguage yet lack all conception of internal psychological states, thoughts, and sense impressions?
We [can] characterize the original Rylean language in which they described
themselves and their fellows as not only a behavioristic language, but a behavioristic language which is restricted to the non-theoretical vocabulary of a
behavioristic psychology. Suppose, now, that in the attempt to account for
the fact that his fellow men behave intelligently not only when their conduct
is threaded on a string of overt verbal episodes – that is to say, as we would
put it when they “think out loud” – but also when no detectable verbal output
is present, Jones develops a theory according to which overt utterances are

