248 Joakim Sandberg
In B there are twice as many people living as in A, and these people are
all worse off than everyone in A. But the lives of those in B, compared with
those in A, are more than half as much worth living. [. . .] Which would be
the better outcome? [. . .] I can now state the [. . .] Impersonal Total Principle:
If other things are equal, the best outcome is the one in which there would
be the greatest quantity of whatever makes life worth living. [. . .] Z is some
enormous population whose members have lives that are not much above the
level where life ceases to be worth living. [. . .] In each of these lives there is
very little happiness. But, if the numbers are large enough, this is the outcome
with the greatest total sum of happiness. [. . .] The Impersonal Total Principle
then implies The Repugnant Conclusion: For any possible population of at
least ten billion people, all with a very high quality of life, there must be some
much larger imaginable population whose existence, if other things are equal,
would be better, even though its members have lives that are barely worth
living. As my choice of name suggests, I find this conclusion very hard to
accept. [. . .] If we are convinced that Z is worse than A, we have strong
grounds for resisting principles which imply that Z is better. We have strong
grounds for resisting the Impersonal Total Principle. (Parfit, 385–90)

P1. The “quantity of whatever makes life worth living” in a given population is a function of the quantity of its members and their quality of life.
P2. One can increase the quantity of whatever makes life worth living in a
given population by simply adding people whose lives are worth living.
P3. If in one of two outcomes the quality of lives in a population is lower,
the quantity of whatever makes life worth living can still be higher if
sufficiently many people are added whose lives are worth living.
C1. If A is a population of at least ten billion people with a very high
quality of life, there must be some much larger imaginable population,
Z, where the quantity of whatever makes life worth living would be
greater even though its members have lives that are barely worth living
(instantiation, P3).
P4. If, other things being equal, the best outcome would be the one in which
there is the greatest quantity of whatever makes life worth living, one
outcome is better than another if the quantity of whatever makes life
worth living is greater.
C2. If, other things being equal, the best outcome would be the one in
which there is the greatest quantity of whatever makes life worth
living, Z would be better than A (modus ponens, C1, P4).
P5. Z is worse than A.
C3. It is not the case that, other things being equal, the best outcome
would be the one in which there is the greatest quantity of whatever
makes life worth living (modus tollens, C2, P5).

