The simulation heuristic

205

Table 1. Analysis of first completion of the "if only" stem

Response categories

Time version

Route version

(i) Route
(ii) Time
(iii) Crossing
(iv) Boy
(v) Other

8
16
19
18
1

33
2
14
13
3

event that fails to occur: Not a single subject mentioned that if Mr. Jones
had come to the intersection two or three seconds earlier he would have
gone through safely. The finding is typical: Events are not mentally
undone by arbitrary alterations in the values of continuous variables.
Evidently, subjects do not perform the undoing task by eliminating that
necessary condition of the critical event that has the lowest prior probability - a procedure that would surely lead them to focus on the extraordinary
coincidence of the two cars meeting at the intersection. Whatever it is that
people do, then, is not perfectly correlated with prior probability.
The alterations that people introduce in stories can be classified as
downhill, uphill, or horizontal changes. A downhill change is one that
removes a surprising or unexpected aspect of the story, or otherwise
increases its internal coherence. An uphill change is one that introduces
unlikely occurrences. A horizontal change is one in which an arbitrary
value of a variable is replaced by another arbitrary value, which is neither
more nor less likely than the first. The experimental manipulation caused
a change of route to be downhill in one version, uphill in the other, with a
corresponding variation in the character of changes of the timing of Mr.
Jones's fatal trip. The manipulation was clearly successful: Subjects were
more likely to undo the accident by restoring a normal value of a variable
than by introducing an exception. In general, uphill changes are relatively
rare in the subjects' responses, and horizontal changes are non-existent.
The notion of downhill and uphill changes is borrowed from the
experience of the cross-country skier, and it is intended to illustrate the
special nature of the distance relation that can be defined for possible
states of a system. The essential property of that relation is that it is not
symmetric. For the cross-country skier, a brief downhill run from A to B is
often paired with a long and laborious climb from B to A. In this metaphor,
exceptional states or events are peaks, normal states or events are valleys.
Thus, we propose that the psychological distance from an exception to the
norm that it violates is smaller than the distance from the norm to the
same exception. The preference for downhill changes is perhaps the major
rule that mental simulations obey; it embodies the essential constraints
that lend realism to counterfactual fantasies.
A notable aspect of the results shown in Table 1 is the relatively low
Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Boston University Libraries, on 27 Jun 2017 at 08:48:21, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511809477.015

