causation or ‘creation’.10 For something that was not itself caused by anything in nature
could not be ordered in relation to other experiences in time and would fall outside the
spatio-temporal framework of experience. The principle of causality is thus valid, Kant
claims, without exception for all of nature:
it is a universal law of the very possibility of all experience that everything which
happens has a cause. Hence the causality of the cause, which itself happens or comes
to be, must itself in turn have a cause; and thus the entire field of experience,
however far it may extend, is transformed into a sum-total of mere nature.11
According to Kant, it is thus an a priori and constitutive law that every change in nature has
a natural cause. The principle of causality is a universal law of nature as such, that is, of all
that which can, in principle, be experienced.
So far, this is Kant’s well-known story about the a priori principle of causality. In the
Critique of Teleological Judgment, however, Kant seems to complicate matters by introducing a
further principle of mechanical causation. There, Kant is concerned not with the general
concept of nature of the Critique of Pure Reason, but with ‘particular experiences’ of material,
or corporeal, nature and, more specifically, of living beings as opposed to non-living things.12
Thus, Kant argues that we experience organisms, but not inanimate nature, as characterised
by a specific organisation. Plants and animals are distinguished by a particular kind of
arrangement of their parts within the whole and by a reciprocal interdependence between
these parts. To take Kant’s own example again, if we consider ‘the structure of a bird, the
hollowness of its bones, the placement of the wings for movement and of its tail for steering
etc.’ we seem to think of the parts of the bird as determined by their function within the
organism as a whole.13 Our understanding of the eye as an organ of the bird, for example, is
determined by its function for the working of the whole organism. We conceive of the eye as
that organ which enables the bird to see. More generally, the existence and form of the
individual parts of an organism seem to be purposive for the existence and survival of the
organism as a whole. And insofar as each individual organ is, in turn, dependent on the
10 CPR, A206/B251. Already in the Dreams of a Spirit Seer Kant calls any attempt to explain nature by

means of immaterial principles a ‘resort of lazy reason’ (II 331). It is therefore a mistake to claim that
the transcendental principle of causality leaves open the possibility of a different kind of causality.
Two authors who argue for this possibility are Bernhard Rang, ‘Naturnotwendigkeit und Freiheit. Zu
Kants Theorie der Kausalität als Antwort auf Hume’, Kant-Studien, 81 (1990): 24-56; and Georg Sans,
Ist Kants Ontologie naturalistisch? Die „Analogien der Erfahrung“ in der „Kritik der reinen Vernunft“
(Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 2000).
11 CPR, A533/B561, translation amended.
12 CJ, V 386.
13 CJ, V 360.

5

