insofar as it is a principle of the understanding that every event in material nature has a
mechanical cause, the understanding provides, or makes available, to our reflective faculty
of judgment a mechanistic interpretation of the principle of the unity of nature. In our search
for mechanical explanations we interpret the regulative principle of the lawful unity of
nature in mechanistic terms, thus yielding the maxim of mechanism.
The proposed reading can, I suggest, avoid the difficulties facing the two competing
interpretations of the maxim of mechanism contrasted in Section 2. First, although the
concept of the mechanism of nature has constitutive status, the maxim itself is purely
regulative. Insofar as it is a specific interpretation of the regulative principle of the unity of
nature it provides a guide for our reflections about the causal structure of nature. This is why
the maxim makes a claim about how we are to approach nature rather than about the
objective character of nature itself. The maxim is not regulative because it asks us to make
use of a subjective concept of mechanism but rather because it is a specification of the more
general regulative principle of the lawful unity of nature. The maxim of mechanism has
regulative status, in other words, because it expresses a specific interpretation of the
subjective principle that nature as a whole is systematically organised according to laws
cognisable by the human understanding.
This reading implies that the regulative status of the maxim of mechanism cannot
simply be explained by reference to the apparent teleological character of living beings that
Kant discusses in the third Critique. It is not just the experience of organisms as such which
makes it necessary, for Kant, to relegate the mechanical principle to a merely regulative
status. Even if living nature could, in other words, be explained according to mechanical
laws the maxim of mechanism would thus remain regulative.52 This suggests that, on Kant’s
account, the challenge raised by the apparently non-mechanistic character of living beings is
a challenge that arises once the regulative status of the maxim of mechanism has already
been accounted for. It is a challenge that persists even if we agree that the mechanistic
maxim is a purely regulative guide for the study of nature.53
Second, the proposed reading of the maxim of mechanism also offers an answer to the
worry that we may not be able to ascribe a determinate or objective status to mechanical
According to Marcel Quarfood, ‘the plurality of special laws harmonizing in sustaining the
organism presents a complexity which at least with respect to the “peculiarity” of the human vantage
point is infinitely too vast for the mechanical mode of explanation to be anything more than just a
regulative principle’ (Transcendental Idealism and the Organism: Essays on Kant (Stockholm: Almquist &
Wiksell, 2004), p. 205). According to the reading I have proposed here, however, it is not the particular
complexity of organisms that makes the ‘mechanical mode of explanation’ purely regulative. Rather, it
is the claim that all of nature can be so explained that must be regarded as a purely regulative guide to
our mechanical explanation of particular natural objects.
53 This is why the conflict between a mechanistic and a teleological maxim remains, according to Kant,
even if these maxims are understood as purely regulative principles.
52

17

