

’  

Kant’s deﬁnition of the concept of magnitude leaves us with a puzzle and
some unanswered questions. Those commentators who included “synthetic
unity” in Kant’s concept of magnitude and interpreted that to correspond to
the category of unity did so because the Axioms principle is supposed to
correspond to the categories of quantity, as indeed it in some way should.
How, on the present account, can we make sense of that correspondence?
Moreover, how do we explain why Kant sometimes refers to the category or
categories of magnitude? We also do not yet have an account of how the
concept of magnitude contributes to the mathematical determination of spaces
and times at the root of mathematical cognition. The answer to these questions
turns on Kant’s distinction between two notions of magnitude: quantum and
quantitas.

3.5

Quantum and Quantitas

The distinction and the relation between quantum and quantitas are central
features of Kant’s account of mathematical cognition, but are also among the
most difﬁcult. In order to proceed, we need to have at least a preliminary sense
of the meaning of these terms, which will be all that will be attempted in this
section; we will sharpen our understanding of them in the coming chapters.
Even then, however, we will not be in a position to give a complete interpretation of them that includes their relation to number in this work; some claims
will be fully defended only in a monograph focused on the details of Kant’s
understanding of arithmetic in particular.
Kant’s deﬁnition of magnitude at the beginning of the Axioms is, as his
parenthetical insertion indicates, the deﬁnition not just of magnitude but of
a quantum (der Begriff einer Größe (Quanti)). Hence, all that we have
discussed up to this point concerns quanta. Later in the Axioms of
Intuition, Kant draws a distinction between a quantum and quantitas.
Kant uses the term magnitude (Größe) for both quantum and quantitas,
using these latter terms or adding them in parentheses when he chooses to
be careful. As mentioned in Chapter 1, however, Kant is often not careful; in
many contexts, we are left to sort out for ourselves which notion of magnitude Kant has in mind, and commentators can hardly be blamed for having
difﬁculty keeping them apart. Furthermore, as noted above, Kant sometimes
refers to the categories or even the category of magnitude rather than to the
categories of quantity, and he does not specify which sense of magnitude he
has in mind.
The Latin -itas ending generally denotes a related but more abstract thing,
concept, or name than that indicated by the stem word to which it is afﬁxed.
This leads one to expect that quantum is used to refer to something relatively
concrete, something that is a magnitude, while quantitas refers to the magnitude of a thing in some more abstract sense that concerns the quantity of the

