

’  

8.4

Kant’s New Understanding of Quality in Relation to
Quanta and Quantitas

As already noted in previous chapters, Kant used Baumgarten’s Metaphysica
in his lectures on metaphysics for many years, and his notes in his copy of
Baumgarten provide a great resource for understanding his reaction to
Leibnizian-Wolfﬁan metaphysics. One must use these sources carefully, however; one can be most conﬁdent that they reﬂect Kant’s views when he
consistently disagrees with the Leibnizian-Wolfﬁan metaphysics. In his early
career, apparent agreement might simply reﬂect his teaching from those texts,
while as Kant enters the critical period, one can be increasingly conﬁdent that
a correspondence between his lectures and Baumgarten’s Metaphysica indicate
actual agreement. This is especially true when what else Kant says, including
his departures from Baumgarten, presuppose some common ground.
With these precautions in mind, it is clear that Kant adopts and agrees with
many features of the metaphysics of quantity found in Leibniz, Wolff, and
Baumgarten. In lectures on metaphysics present during 1782–3, for example,
Kant takes issue with various features of Baumgarten’s account, but also
asserts, without objection or qualiﬁcation, the traditional philosophical deﬁnitions of equality as identity of quantity and similarity as identity of quality
(Metaphysik Mongrovius, 1782–3, 29:838). And in lectures given in 1783–4,
Kant again presents the traditional deﬁnitions without any critical comment
(Metaphysik Volkmann, 1784–5, 28:414). Kant also states in the Critique that
the principle that equals added to equals or subtracted from equals are equal is
analytic, because it rests on the consciousness of the identity of two productions of magnitude (A164/B204f ). I examine this passage and the connection
between equality and magnitude production more closely elsewhere.23 For
now, it sufﬁces to note that Kant ties equality to the representation of
magnitudes, and that there is an analytic dependence of equality on identity.
Several passages in the Amphiboly of the Critique provide direct evidence that
Kant accepts the traditional metaphysical deﬁnitions of similarity and equality,
where he indicates that identity of the qualitative and quantitative inner
determinations of two objects entails their similarity and equality, respectively
(A263f/B319, A272/B328).24 Kant reafﬁrms this connection in a ﬁrst draft of
What Real Progress Has Metaphysics Made in Germany since the Time of
Leibniz and Wolff? (20:282). Signiﬁcantly, as we shall see, Kant also agrees
with Baumgarten that quantitative and qualitative properties of a thing can be
distinguished by whether the properties can be clearly cognized in the thing on
its own.

23
24

See Sutherland (2005a).
I return to this passage in Section 9.8.

