C O L L E C T I O N R E G I M E S A N D D O N O R P O P U L AT I O N S

the odds of donating blood increase with educational attainment and
income.
Research also suggests that people are more likely to donate blood if
they know other donors or if they know people who have received transfusions (or other blood products). Similarly, a study by Alvin Drake and his
collaborators found that those who are “close to blood needs” were more
likely to donate.8 We should therefore expect a network effect: if all your
friends are blood donors, you are likely to be one too. If you know a hemophiliac, you should also be more likely to have given blood at some point.

Blood Collection Regimes
Individual motives for giving blood must be set in the context of institutionalized methods for collecting it. Richard Titmuss’s The Gift Relationship remains the most influential study of cross-national institutional
variation in the blood supply and is almost the only example of its kind.9
I discuss some of the difficulties with Titmuss’s arguments about the relative quality of blood in volunteer and for-profit systems in the next
chapter. His emphasis on the consequences of variation in the social organization of the blood supply, however, was fundamentally correct. For
Titmuss, it was the structure of the health system, not the psychology of
donors, that was crucial to the composition of the donor pool.
In spite of a common European Union policy encouraging voluntary
blood donation, we find that rates of donation and modes of organization differ considerably across countries. Figure 4.1 shows the percentage of people in thirteen countries who have ever given blood, as reported
in the 1993 Eurobarometer survey.10 The rates range from 14 percent in
Luxembourg to 44 percent next door in France. This wide variation in
donation rates is interesting. Why should there be 20 or 30 percentage
points difference between France and Greece, on the one hand, and Luxembourg and Portugal, on the other? If we think of donation as purely a
question of individual motivation, it seems unlikely that the individual
propensity to generosity should change quite so abruptly at national borders. We should also be wary of writing the difference off to cultural variation, particularly given that countries that we might expect to fall together culturally (France and Luxembourg, Denmark and Norway) have
dissimilar donation rates.
Individual-level explanations cannot properly account for this variation. We should look beyond the psychology of giving to the social organization of the blood supply. As noted above, there are three relevant
73

