TUGboat, Volume 32 (2011), No. 3
Towards LATEX coding standards
Didier Verna

309

- Readability
- Maintainability
\relax
\keepcool
\takeiteas
y

Abstract

- Robustness
- Reliability

Because LATEX is only a macro expansion system, the
language does not impose any kind of good software
engineering practice, program structure or coding
style. Maybe because in the LATEX world, collaboration is not so widespread, the idea of some LATEX
coding standards is not so pressing as with other
programming languages. Over the years, however,
the permanent flow of personal development experiences contributed to shaping our own taste in terms
of coding style. In this paper, we report on all these
experiences and describe the programming practices
that have helped us improve the quality of our code.

1.1

1

If one looks at the rationale behind most coding
styles, the intended purpose is always to

Introduction

If the notion of coding style is probably almost as
old as computer science itself, the concern for style
in general is even older. An interesting starting
point is the book “The Elements of Style” [16], first
published in 1918 (the fourth edition appeared in
1999). This book is a style guide for writing American English and has been a source of inspiration for
similar books in computer science later on. It is interesting to mention the fact that this book has been
virulently criticized since its very first publication.
Although generally considered as a reference book,
the authors were also accused of being condescending
in tone and of having only a very partial view on
what proper American English should be. This is
already a strong indication that talking about style,
whether in natural of programming languages, can
be quite controversial. Indeed, a style, in large part,
is a matter of personal taste before anything else.
Consequently, what is considered to be good style by
one person can legitimately be viewed as bad style
by another person.
The first book on style in programming languages was published in 1974 (a second edition appeared in 1978) and was entitled “The Elements of
Programming Style” [8], as an explicit reference to
its aforementioned predecessor. Although this book
was not dedicated to one programming language in
particular, it was still largely influenced by the few of
that time. Since then, numerous books on programming style appeared, many of them focusing on one
specific language, and being entitled “The Elements
of XXX Programming Style” to follow the tradition.
This includes recent languages such as C#.

- Portability
- Extensibility
- Intercession

Figure 1: The coding standards many-festos

The coding standards many-festos

help programmers read and understand
source code, not only their own, but that of
others.
An interesting paragraph from the introductory section of the GNU Coding Standards [15] reads as
follows:
Their purpose is to make the GNU system
clean, consistent, and easy to install. This
document can also be read as a guide
to writing portable, robust and reliable
programs.
From these widely accepted views on the notion of
coding style, we can draw three different points of
view on the subject, as depicted in figure 1.
Human From the human point of view, using a
proper coding style helps to improve the readability
of source code, and as a corollary, its maintainability.
Software From the software point of view, using
a proper coding style helps to make the program
more robust and reliable. Note that there is a subtle
but important difference between robustness and
reliability. Reliability means that the program should
do what it is expected to do. Robustness means that
the program should handle unexpected situations as
gracefully as possible.
Man-in-the-middle Third and last, the intermediate point of view is at the interface between humans and programs (note the plural). In this regard,
the GNU Coding Standards mention the question of
portability. This is essentially due to the fact that
the GNU project mostly deals with C code, for which
portability is indeed an important problem. This,
Towards LATEX coding standards

