TUGboat, Volume 32 (2011), No. 3
\@ifpackageloaded allows you to detect when
a package has been used or required, and possibly
take counter-measures. However, this is only a curative way of doing things: it only lets you provide
post-loading (a posteriori ) code. What if you need
to take precautionary measures instead?
\AtBeginDocument allows one to massively defer code execution until the beginning of a document,
that is, after every package has been loaded. This
is obviously a very gross granularity. For example,
it doesn’t provide any information on the order in
which the packages have been loaded, something that
might be needed even for post-preamble code.
Consider for example the following scenario:
• Style S calls \AtBeginDocument{\things}
• Class C loads style S
And ask yourself the following question: how does
class C intercede on \things? There is no simple
way to sort this out with the standard LATEX tools.
4.3.2

filehook

Like probably almost every package developer, we
have fought against these problems for years with
intricate and obfuscated logic to fix inter-package
compatibility. We think however that the very recent
appearance of Martin Scharrer’s filehook package
is (should be) a crucial component in cleaning up
the current intercession mess.
The filehook package provides pre- and postloading hooks to files that you input in every possible way (\include’d files, packages, even class
files). Thanks to that, one can now handle intercession in a context-free way, which is much better
than what was possible before. For example, you
can take both a priori and a posteriori countermeasures against any package, without even knowing
for sure if the package is going to be loaded at all.
This notably includes the possibility of saving and
restoring functionality, much like what OpenGL does
with its PushMatrix / PopMatrix or PushAttrib /
PopAttrib functions (although OpenGL uses real
stacks for this).
Eventually, the existence of filehook allowed
us to come up with a particular design pattern for
intercession management that can be summarized as
follows. So far, this pattern works (for us) surprisingly well.
• First of all, start by writing your code as if
there were no intercession problem. In other
words, simply implement the default behavior
as usual, assuming that no other package would
be loaded.

325
• Next, handle compatibility problems with packages, one at a time, and only locally: use preand post-hooks exclusively to do so.
• Remember that hook code is only potential :
none of it will be executed if the corresponding package is not loaded.
• Also, note that getting information on package loading order is now trivial if you use
\@ifpackageloaded in a pre-hook.
• Avoid using \AtBeginDocument for intercession,
unless absolutely necessary; for instance, if you
need to take a counter-measure against a package that already uses it. Again, in such a case,
calling \AtBeginDocument in a post-hook will
allow you to plug in the relevant code at exactly
the right position in the \@begindocumenthook
chain.
4.3.3

Bibliography management in CurVe

To provide a concrete example of these ideas, let us
demonstrate how recent versions of CurVe handle compatibility with various bibliography-related packages.
A summarized version is given in figure 8 on the
following page. Roughly speaking, what this code
does is:
• install the default, CurVe-specific behavior first,
• step back if bibentry is loaded,
• merge with multibib,
• step back before splitbib and re-merge afterwards,
• render hyperref inoperative.
Knowing where we came from, that is, how this
logic was done before filehook, it is amazing how
readable, clear, concise, and in fact simple, this new
implementation is. We cannot be sure how striking
this will be for the unacquainted reader, but in case
it is not, you are invited, as an exercise, to try an
implement this only with the standard LATEX macros
(hint: it is practically impossible).
Earlier, we claimed that filehook would allow
us to program in a context-free way. Let us explain
now what we meant by that. First of all, note that
because we use hooks exclusively to plug our intercession code, the five special cases could have been
implemented in any order in the CurVe source file.
We can move the five blocks around without modifying the semantics of the program. This is what we
mean by being “context-free”: the current dynamic
state of the program has no effect on the code we
put in hooks. Another instance of context freedom
is in the specific case of hyperref. The important
thing to notice here is that we save (and restore)
whatever state we had just before loading hyperref.
Towards LATEX coding standards

