118

Gry Hasselbalch and Aimee Van Wynsberghe

and the sustainability of AI,1 which includes a view on the physical infrastructure of
AI and what this means in terms of the exploitation of people and the planet. Here,
we also use the example of “data pollution” to examine the sustainability of AI from
multiple angles.2 In the last part of the chapter, we explore the ethical implications
of AI on sustainability. Here, we apply a “data ethics of power”3 as an analytical tool
that can help further explore the power dynamics that shape the ethical implications of AI for the sustainable development agenda and its goals.

6.2 AI and the Global Sustainable
Development Agenda
Public and policy discourse around AI is often characterized by hype and technological determinism. Companies are increasingly marketing their big data initiatives
as “AI” projects4 and AI has gained significant strategic importance in geopolitics as
a symbol of regions’ and countries’ competitive advantages in the world. However,
in all of this, it is important to remember that AI is a human technology with farreaching consequences for our environment and future societies. Consequently,
the ethical implications of AI must be considered integral to the ongoing global
public and policy agenda on sustainable development. Here, the socio-technical
constitution of AI necessitates reflection on its sustainability in our present and a
new narrative about the role it plays in our common futures.5 The “sustainable”
approach is one that is inclusive in both time and space; where the past, present,
and future of human societies, the planet, and environment are considered equally
important to protect and secure, as is the integration of all countries in economic
and social change.6 Furthermore, our use of the concept “sustainable” demands we
ask what practices in the current development and use of AI we want to maintain
and alternatively what practices we want to repair and/or change.
AI technologies are today widely recognized as having the potential to help
achieve sustainability goals such as those outlined in the EU’s Green Deal7 and
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

Aimee van Wynsberghe, “Sustainable AI: AI for sustainability and the sustainability of AI” (2021) AI
and Ethics, 1: 213, 218.
Gry Hasselbalch, “Data pollution & power: A white paper for a global sustainable development
agenda on AI” (2022), www.datapollution.eu/, accessed June 27, 2023.
Gry Hasselbalch, Data Ethics of Power. A Human Approach in the Big Data and AI Era (Edward
Elgar, 2021).
Madeleine C Elish and Danah Boyd, “Situating methods in the magic of big data and artificial intelligence” (2018) Communication Monographs, 85: 57.
Francesco Lapenta, Our Common AI Future (JCU Future and Innovation, 2021).
As outlined throughout the “Brundtland report”/World Commission on Environment and
Development, “Our Common Future,” https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/​
5987our-common-future.pdf, accessed June 6, 2023.
Council of the European Union, European Green Deal, accessed July 19, 2024: www.consilium​
.europa.eu/en/policies/green-deal/

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 177.249.163.232, on 22 Feb 2025 at 05:56:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/0AD007641DE27F837A3A16DBC0888DD1

