Laws of Nature

71

we are limited in ways that make metaphysics difficult even if we don’t agree
with Hume’s later diagnosis of the human condition and his specific empiricist theses. Thus, even before we diagnose the reasons why we struggle to do
metaphysics well, the following position might seem attractive:

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009109949 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(Humean) Minimalism: Metaphysics should be avoided insofar as possible.113
After all, metaphysics is abstract, speculative, and difficult. We are seriously limited, so why go to the trouble? Before we proceed, here are some
clarifications about this position.
First, do not confuse Minimalism with a criterion of ontological economy.
Economy criteria are metaphysical criteria that help us to select metaphysical
theories. Minimalism tells us to avoid metaphysics.
Second, Minimalism doesn’t say that metaphysics can’t be done, and it
doesn’t tell us to avoid metaphysics altogether. (That wouldn’t be very modest.) It might be impossible to avoid metaphysics entirely, especially since
certain theoretical and practical projects seem to have at least some ontological
commitments.
Third, if we are to embrace Minimalism, we’ll need to decide which theoretical projects are essential, as that will determine which parts of metaphysics
are unavoidable. This is a general point about Minimalism. I have not yet said
anything about how Minimalism relates to laws. However, this gives us an
important clue as to how it might.
Suppose we value the sciences. Then we must trust induction, both to establish scientific theories and to apply them to the world. And in particular, we
need some way to distinguish between good inductive inferences and bad. To do
these things, we have to assume that nature is uniform. This claim does not seem
to be entirely metaphysically neutral. It’s about nature, after all.114 However,
it does not require us to take a stand on the debate between Humeanism and
Non-Humeanism. The assumption that nature is uniform supports these theoretical and practical projects to some extent regardless of whether (i) we posit
Non-Humean whatnots that underlie and explain the principle or (ii) we simply
113

Minimalism admits of different interpretations, but here is a modest one. We could interpret it
as a stance in van Fraassen’s (1980) sense, such that adopting the position amounts to endorsing the following: “I resolve to avoid taking a stand on metaphysical questions unless I have
to do so.” Thanks to Trevor Teitel for encouraging me to consider different formulations of
Minimalism.
114 Specifically, it might point towards an objective conception of nature. Further, it may require
that we give accounts of properties and of the structure of spacetime, since these are involved
in our understanding of regularities.

