Laws of Nature

63

give rise to irregular worlds even though it has the form of a generalization!
However, they might block this implication by proposing a further restriction:
nomic relations involving simpler construction functions are just more likely
to obtain. (Perhaps this could be motivated by the claim that simplicity of fundamental theoretical posits is a theoretical virtue.) In sum, if statements of law
must be written in languages with natural properties, and simpler statements
are more likely to obtain than complex ones, then there are good reasons not to
worry about arbitrarily complex functions.105
These solutions are speculative, of course. However, I think they give us
some reason for optimism that Non-Humeanism (or some version anyway)
does provide a better explanation of regularities than Humeanism. However,
as I mentioned at the outset, this judgment depends on some significant epistemological assumptions as well. In the next section, we’ll examine some of
them more carefully.

8 Epistemological and Methodological Issues

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009109949 Published online by Cambridge University Press

8.1 Method in Metaphysics
In this section, we’ll consider some epistemological and methodological issues
that arise for the metaphysics of laws of nature. As you may have noticed, metaphysics is hard. Its questions are general and abstract. Competing metaphysical
theories often are, or seem to be, empirically equivalent.
Here is a sample description of a method of practicing metaphysics that is
loosely inspired by Quine (1948):
Neo-Quinean Method: Metaphysical theorizing consists of determining
which theoretical beliefs best fit within our web of beliefs – a web that is
informed, but not wholly determined, by experience. The best fitting theory
is the one with the best balance of theoretical virtues such as familiarity of
primitives, simplicity, ontological parsimony, explanatory strength, and the
like.
This statement is intentionally vague. I want it to be compatible with many
specific ways of doing metaphysics. But here are some clarifications.

105

It is worth mentioning that the two constraints suggested here – one concerning natural predicates and one concerning simplicity – align nicely with two constraints proposed by Chen
and Goldstein (2022) in their defense of a version of Primitivism. Although Primitivists and
property-based theorists start with different perspectives, we may see a convergence of theories
as they are updated in response to various explanatory challenges.

