INDUCTION, RATIONAL ACCEPTANCE, AND SETS

ductive consequence of such a disjunction d and b. Proof: Either there
is some member m of P such that for every other member k of P,
p(m,b) exceeds p(k,b) or there is not. Suppose there is such a member m. In that case, by condition (i) of AR and T6 it follows that for
every other member k of P, I(~k,b), and the set of such negations of
other members of P has m as a deductive consequence. Hence by condition (ii) of AR, it follows that A(m,b). Moreover, I(b,b) from the
fact that p(b,b) — 1 by P3, and thus there must be some k in any minimally inconsistent set to which b belongs such that p(k,b) is less than
1. Hence by condition (i) of AR, A(b,b). By condition (ii) of AR
it follows that for any s that is a deductive consequence of m and b,
A(s,b). This proves that for any s that satisfies condition (a) of the
theorem A(s,b). Suppose that there is no member m of P such that
for any other member k of P, p(m,b) exceeds p(k,b). In that case,
there will be a disjunction d of members of a set S of members of P
such that m is a member of S if and only if for any member k of P, if
p(m,b) = 7^p(k,b), then p(m,b) exceeds p(k,b). For any member k
of P that is not a disjunct of k (if there are any), I(^k,b) by T6,
and the set of such negations of members of P that are not disjuncts
of d has d as a deductive consequence. (If the set is null, d would
be a disjunction of all members of P and, hence, would be a deductive consequence of the set by natural deduction.) Hence A(d,b) by
condition (ii) of AR. Again, A(b,b) by the argument given above.
By condition (ii) of AR it follows that for any s that is a deductive
consequence of d and b, A(s,b). This proves that for any s that satisfies condition (b) of the theorem A(s,b) by AR. This shows that
if s satisfies either condition (a) or (b) of the theorem, then A(s,b)
by AR. We shall now prove that if A(s,b) by AR, then s satisfies
either condition (i) or (ii) of the theorem. Again, either there is some
member m of P such that, for every other member k of P, p(m,b)
exceeds p(k,b), or there is not. Suppose there is such a member. For
any s in G, either s is a deductive consequence of m and b or it is
not the case that A(s,b) by AR. For consider the set G' of all those
members of G that are not deductive consequences of m and b. Any
g that is a member of G' is such that the set whose only members
are m and g is a minimally inconsistent set, because m is inconsistent
with every member of G' and no such member is itself inconsistent.
But p(m,b) exceeds p(g,b) by T5, PI, and P4. Hence for any such
321

