Keith Lehrer
system. Languages without individual constants may be thought of as
being defined by a partition, only in this case the partition will not be
a set of state-descriptions. Finally, let it be noticed that a partition can
be generated from any set of statements. If one has a set of statements,
hi, h2, and so forth, then one can construct a partition by forming maximal conjunctions such that each h^ or its negation (but not both) is
contained in order in each maximal conjunction. When one thus obtains
a set of such conjunctions containing all possible permutations and then
eliminates those maximal conjunctions that are inconsistent, the remaining set of maximal conjunctions will be a partition.
6. Results of the Inductive Rule. With the foregoing technical remarks
on the board, we may then ask what sort of results (I) yields. The results may be succinctly characterized. A disjunction of members of the
ultimate partition may be inductively inferred from background knowledge if and only if the probability of the hypothesis on background
knowledge exceeds the probability of the denial of at least one disjunct
on the same knowledge.10 A single member of the ultimate partition
may be inductively inferred from background knowledge if and only if
it is more probable than its denial on background knowledge.11 Only
(but not all) those hypotheses having a probability greater than 1/2 on
background knowledge will be ones that can be inductively inferred
from background knowledge.12
We obtain a more concrete idea of the results by again considering
lotteries. In the fair lottery, we may not inductively infer that the number one ticket will not win, because this hypothesis may be considered
as a disjunction of the hypotheses saying that either the number two
ticket or the number three ticket and so forth will win. The denial of
each of these disjuncts is equal in probability to that of the hypothesis
that the number one ticket will not win. Hence the probability of the
hypothesis does not exceed the probability of the denial of any disjunct
contained in it.
Now let us consider some skewed lotteries where the tickets have differing probabilities of being the winner. In the event that it is more
probable that a ticket will win than lose, we may inductively infer the
10

See T6 in the appendix for a proof of this result.
See T5 in the appendix for a proof of this result.
The proof of this hypothesis follows from the theorem that a hypothesis having
a probability no greater than 1/2 has no greater probability than its denial.
11
12

304

