Logic in Philosophy of Science

3

course on scientific explanation still starts with these models, and it
would be wrong to think that this were so merely because these models
were historically influential: it is also because they are extremely clear,
they put all their cards on the table, and they do a very nice job as
paradigmatic schemata which may help organising our thoughts even
when we are convinced that they will ultimately prove to be inadequate.
So here is the counterclaim: just as in any scientific endeavour, abstractness, simplicity and idealisation are often exactly what we want
in philosophy, and there is nothing wrong about this as long as we
keep in mind that, for the sake of the general view, we forgot about
certain properties and we simplified or idealised others.2 And, yes, to
state the obvious: historical considerations by themselves are not yet
philosophical ones (even though it never can hurt to be historically
informed).
At the end of the day, logical model building is still likely to be one
of the most successful methods in general philosophy of science. Indeed,
even some of the “old” logical insights into science from the 1920s and
1930s are just as relevant to modern philosophy of science as they were
back then. Let me give an example.

2. Old Things and New Things: A Classic Example of
Logical Analysis
Structural Realism (Worrall, 1989) holds that when one of our empirically successful theories of the past got replaced by one that was even
more successful empirically, the mathematical structure—and more or
less only the mathematical structure—of the original theory was preserved in the transition. Hence, we should commit ourselves only to
this mathematical-structural content of our scientific theories.
This highly influential position in the recent debates on Realism,
Antirealism, and their alternatives, is not without predecessors; e.g.:
“. . . we get the result that principally every scientific statement can
be transformed in the way that it becomes a structure statement.
But this transformation is not only possible, it is also asked for.
For science wants to talk of the objective; however, everything
that does not belong to the structure but to the material, everything concrete, is ultimately subjective. In physics we observe
2
See (Kuipers, 2007) for an excellent review of, amongst others, the roles of the
desideratum of simplicity and of the strategy of idealisation in the explication of
concepts.

LeitgebLogPhilSciSynthFIN.tex; 2/09/2009; 10:52; p.3

