Logic in Philosophy of Science

11

again: As it turned out, theoretical computer scientists eventually ran
into similar questions and problems as philosophers of science and
philosophers of language had done before them. It is true that some
logicians are now getting paid by computer science departments or computer companies to work on something they would have published just
a few years back in the Journal of Philosophical Logic or in Philosophy
of Science, which may be bad for philosophy departments—and if so, it
is bad —but this won’t diminish the future relevance of logical methods
for philosophy of science. It doesn’t really matter if these methods are
presented as the theoretical underpinnings of some fancy AI application or as a new take on the problem of induction, does it? As Clark
Glymour (Glymour, 1992), p. 367 pointed out, “Carnap wrote the first
artificial intelligence program” in his Aufbau, and indeed in many ways
Artificial Intelligence is a natural continuation of the Vienna Circle’s
old research programme; see (van Benthem, 1989) for further support of
this claim. If anything, the hands-on spirit of computer scientists, who
are generally very good at building toy models, can only be helpful.
So expect well-known problems in the logic of science to be tackled
by research groups with funny acronym names—it’s computer science
after all.
Another worry, this time internal to philosophy: Is probability theory
about to take over the role that logic had occupied previously in general
philosophy of science? No. Probability theory will complement logic in
peaceful and mutually beneficial coexistence. Two examples:
Example 1: Let Pw be the primitive conditional (Popperian) probability measure that belongs to world w; define
ϕ > ψ is true in w iff Pw (ψ|ϕ) = 1
Then the following theorem holds:
THEOREM 1. (Leitgeb, 2007)
The system V of conditional logic is sound and complete with respect
to this Popper function semantics for conditionals.
V is almost Lewis’ standard system for counterfactuals, and the flat
fragment of V coincides with the logic of |∼ above. Moral: Within
probabilistic structures one can find the typical qualitative structures
that are studied by logicians; one cannot fully understand the former
without understanding the latter.
Example 2: To the best of my knowledge, there is no established
theory of probability for indexical information8 (witness the clash of
8
Though people are working on it: see e.g. Mike Titelbaum’s work at
http://sites.google.com/site/michaeltitelbaum/ and Darren Bradley’s work at
http://faculty.arts.ubc.ca/dbradley/.

LeitgebLogPhilSciSynthFIN.tex; 2/09/2009; 10:52; p.11

