:.

THE DICTIONARY PROBLEM

9

determining which of several sets an element is a member of, or operations based
on an ordering or other auxiliary information associated with the keys in the set.
For the data structures we consider, we will pay some attention to methods for
insertion and deletion, but we shall not discuss the more complicated operations.
We first survey some known methods for set representation, and then propose
a new data structure called a "packed trie".

Data structures
Methods for set representation include the following: sequential lists, sorted
lists, binary search trees, balanced trees, hashing, superimposed coding, bit vectors, and digital search trees (also known as tries). Good discussions of these data
structures can be found in a number of texts, including Knuth [4], Standish [5], and
AHU [6]. Below we make a few remsirks about each of these representations.
A sequential list is the most straightforward representation. It requires both
space and search time proportional to the number of characters in the dictionary.
A sorted list assumes an ordering on the keys, such as alphabetical order.
Binary search allows the search time to be reduced to the logarithm of the size of
the dictionary, but space is not reduced.
A binary search tree also allows search in logarithmic time. This can be thought
of as a more flexible version of a sorted list that can be optimized in various ways.
For example if the probabilities of searching for different keys in the tree are known,
then the tree can be adapted to improve the expected search time. Search trees
can also handle insertions and deletions easily, although an unfavorable sequence of
such operations may degrade the performance of the tree.
Balanced tree schemes (including AVL trees, 2-3 trees, and B-trees) correct
the above-mentioned problem, so that insertions, deletions, and searches can all
be performed in logarithmic time in the worst case. Variants of trees have other
nice properties, too; they allow merging and splitting of sets, and priority queue
operations. B-trees are well-suited to large applications, because they are designed
to minimize the number of secondary memory accesses required to perform a search.
However, space utilization is not improved by any of these tree schemes, and in fact
it is usually increased because of the need for extra pointers.
Hashing is an essentially different approach to the problem. Here a suitable
randomizing function is used to compute the location at which a key is stored.
Hashing methods arc very fast on the average, although the worst case is linear;
fortunately this worst case almost never happens.
An interesting variant of hashing, called superimposed coding, was proposed
by Bloom [7] (see also [4, §6.5], [8]), and at last provides for reduction in space,

