Chapter 3

Hyphenation

Let us now try to apply the ideas of the previous chapter to the problem of
hyphenation. T£JX82 will use the pattern matching method described in Chapter 1,
but we shall first discuss some related approaches that were considered.

Finite-state machines with output
We can modify our trie-based dictionary representation to perform hyphenation
by changing the output of the trie (or finite-state machine) to a multiple-valued
output indicating how the word can be hyphenated, instead of just a binary yes-no
output indicating whether or not the word is in the dictionary. That is, instead of
associating a single bit with each trie transition, we would have a larger "output"
field indicating the hyphenation "action" to be taken on this transition. Thus on
recognizing the word hy-phen-a-tion, the output would say "you can hyphenate
this word after the second, sixth, or seventh letters".
To represent the hyphenation output, we could simply list the hyphen positions,
or we could use a bit vector indicating the allowable hyphen points. Since there
arc only a few hundred different outputs and most of them occur many times, we
can save some space by assigning each output a unique code and storing the actual
hyphen positions in a separate table.
To conveniently handle the variable number of hyphen positions in outputs,
we will use a linked representation that allows different outputs to share common
portions of their output lists. This is implemented using a hash table containing
pairs of the form (output, next), where output is a hyphenation position and next
is a (possibly null) pointer to another entry in the table. To add a new output list
to the table, we hash each of its outputs in turn, making each output point to the
previous one. Interestingly, this process is quite similar to suffix compression.
The trie with hyphenation output can be suffix-compressed and packed in the
same manner as discussed in Chapter 2. Because of the greater variety of outputs more of the subtrics will be distinct, and there is somewhat less compression.

23

