solar system and their physical causes. . . . [But this is a limited
form of argument since it shows only that] the concept is necessary, relative to a certain well-established practice of scientific reasoning about a certain kind of phenomenon. Kant, instead, argues that the Newtonian concept, and the laws of motion, [are necessary in much more general sense:] They are the
only basis on which the concept of causality can be applied to
the universe at large. They are the only basis, indeed, on which
the phenomena of the heavens can be grasped as something
more than mere appearances—as the appearance of genuine
physical objects that stand in objective geometrical and causal
relations.” (71)

of impressions; if this object was not displaced, but changed
its state, that is impossible). Thence comes a new distinction
among external changes: those which may be so corrected we
call changes of position; and the others, changes of state.
Think, for example, of a sphere with one hemisphere blue and
the other red; it first presents to us the blue hemisphere, then
it so revolves as to present the red hemisphere. Now think of a
spherical vase containing a blue liquid which becomes red in
consequence of a chemical reaction. In both cases the sensation of red has replaced that of blue; our senses have experienced the same impressions which have succeeded each other
in the same order, and yet these two changes are regarded by
us as very different; the first is a displacement, the second a
change of state. Why? Because in the first case it is sufficient for
me to go around the sphere to place myself opposite the blue
hemisphere and reestablish the original blue sensation. . . .

23.5. 8 What is the relation between geometry and sensory
perception?

Another example: An object is displaced before my eye; its image was first formed at the center of the retina; then it is formed
at the border. . . . Why . . . am I led to decide that these two
sensations, qualitatively different, represent the same image,
which has been displaced? It is because I can follow the object
with the eye and by a displacement of the eye, voluntary and
accompanied by muscular sensations, bring back the image to
the center of the retina and reestablish the primitive sensation.

23.6. 8 How, and under what conditions, can a mind without
geometrical preconceptions be led to impose a geometrical structure on sensory perceptions?
23.7. 8 Does the experience of blind people becoming
sighted support this account?
23.8. 8 What is Helmholtz’s critique of Kant? How might a
Kantian reply to it?

I suppose that the image of a red object has gone from the center to the border of the retina, then that the image of a blue object goes in its turn from the center to the border of the retina;
I shall decide that these two objects have undergone the same
displacement. Why? Because in both cases I shall have been
able to reestablish the primitive sensation, and that to do it I
shall have had to execute the same movement of the eye, and
I shall know that my eye has executed the same movement because I shall have felt the same muscular sensations.

H ENRI P OINCARÉ, La Valeur de la Science, 1905, quoted
from The Foundations of Science, translated by George
Bruce Halsted, The Science Press, 1913.

“The movements of our body [plays] the preponderant role
. . . in the genesis of the notion of space. For a being completely immovable there would be neither space nor geometry; in vain would exterior objects be displaced about him, the
variations which these displacements would make in his impressions would not be attributed by this being to changes of
position, but to simple changes of state; this being would have
no means of distinguishing these two sorts of changes, and this
distinction, fundamental for us, would have no meaning for
him.

If I could not move my eye, should I have any reason to suppose that the sensation of red at the center of the retina is to the
sensation of red at the border of the retina as that of blue at the
center is to that of blue at the border? I should only have four
sensations qualitatively different, and if I were asked if they are
connected by the proportion I have just stated, the question
would seem to me ridiculous, just as if I were asked if there is
an analogous proportion between an auditory sensation, a tactile sensation and an olfactory sensation.” (I.III.5)

. . . We are led to distinguish the changes produced by our own
motions and we easily discriminate them for two reasons: because they are voluntary; because they are accompanied by
muscular sensations. So we naturally divide the changes that
our impressions may undergo into two categories . . .: the internal changes, which are voluntary and accompanied by muscular sensations; the external changes, having the opposite characteristics.

R ICHARD F EYNMAN, The Feynman Lectures on Physics,
Addison-Wesley, 1963.

“When we look at an object, there is an obvious thing we might
call the ‘apparent width’, and another we might call the ‘depth’.
But the two ideas, width and depth, are not fundamental properties of the object, because if we step aside and look at the
same thing from a different angle, we get a different width and
a different depth, and we may develop some formulas for computing the new ones from the old ones and the angles involved.
. . . If it were impossible ever to move, and we always saw a given

We then observe that among the external changes are some
which can be corrected, thanks to an internal change which
brings everything back to the primitive state; others can not
be corrected in this way (it is thus that, when an exterior object is displaced, we may then by changing our own position
replace ourselves as regards this object in the same relative
position as before, so as to reestablish the original aggregate
54

