kind of operation on bodies in either miraculous or imaginary.’
Whence his famous conflict with Newton on the nature of gravity. Leibniz condemns very fiercely the notion of gravity as a
primitive cause: ‘I maintain that the attraction of bodies, properly called, is a miraculous thing, since it cannot be explained
by the nature of bodies.’ . . . [Newton on the other hand was]
largely content to simply stipulate gravity. ‘With the cause of
gravity [I] meddle not’, says Newton, since ‘I have so little fancy
to things of this nature’.” (58)

V IKTOR B LÅSJÖ, Transcendental curves in the Leibnizian
calculus, Elsevier, 2017.

“For two millennia the method embodied in Euclid’s Elements
was the gold standard of exact reasoning. By the time of the
Renaissance and the scientific revolution it had also passed
the test of time with flying colours: while it seemed that all
other teachings invariably crumbled in the face of expanding knowledge and experience, the Euclidean edifice not only
stood without a scratch but also proved an indispensable foundation for the most exciting new advances in the understanding of the world. The obvious message was not lost on reflective
minds: If you seek certain and eternal truth then you better do
whatever it was that Euclid did.

Another way of putting it is this. It would be very convenient to
postulate:
• In classical geometry, solutions of classical construction
problems.
• In early modern geometry, formulas as definitions of
curves.

But what was it about the Euclidean method that made is so
uniquely successful, and how could it be generalised beyond
its traditional scope? Today the phrase ‘axiomatic-deductive
method’ is often used to try to capture its essence, and indeed it
is based on a small set of axioms, and indeed it proceeds meticulously through short, stringently verified deductive steps. But
17th century eyes saw something more in Euclid, something to
which subsequent generations have grown increasingly blind.
To them the ideal of the Euclidean method represented not a
specialised, formal way of studying geometry, but a model of
reasoning in general and our only reliable window toward an
understanding of the nature of knowledge.

• In physics (as shown by Newton), action at a distance
and absolute space.
But, from an operationalist point of view, it would be epistemologically irresponsible to do so. Instead one must speak only of
what is:
• Generated by very simple processes.
Because then the intuitive warrant of starting principles
propagate through the entire theory.
Geometrical constructions by ruler, compass, and other
basic tools have this property. As does the mechanistic
program of reducing physics to the collisions of bodies.

There were in fact two competing interpretations of the Euclidean method in the 17th century. They are summarised and
contrasted in [Table 1]. As we see, these interpretations generalise the Euclidean method not only to an expanded view
of geometry but also to physics and even philosophy in general. Descartes’s famous phrase cogito ergo sum (‘I think therefore I am’) encapsulates his view: one starts in complete ignorance and nothingness and can only build up one’s knowledge
from the most immediate and undeniable principles. Newton’s
view, by contrast, is summed up in his statement: ‘As in mathematics, so in natural philosophy, the investigation of difficult
things by the method of analysis ought ever to precede the
method of composition.’ That is to say, instead of the Cartesian
method of ‘composing’ all knowledge from intuitive starting
principles, Newton advocates its opposite: analysis, i.e., starting with all the things one wants to understand and then trying to reduce them to simple principles. Euclid’s Elements and
Newton’s Principia both start with a few simple axioms and deduce increasingly more complex results from them, but this,
according to Newton, is not to be seen as mirroring the process
of acquiring knowledge. This ‘method of composition,’ or synthesis, is but a mode of presentation adopted after the fact, for
the sake of consolidating and clarifying logically the insights
gained through analysis.” (205–206)

Newtonian action at a distance, by contrast, violates this
principle.
• Reducible to concrete operations grounded in physical
experience.
Because operational statements are meaningful, knowable, testable; non-operational statements often not. Experience is consistent; speculative thought often not.
The operational reading of geometrical theorems has exactly these properties, as we have seen. In physics, the
same logic leads to the insistence that spatial relations
are always relative because that is the only empirical
knowledge we can have of them: by measurements we
can determine whether a body is moving with respect to
another, but not whether it is “really” moving in some
absolute sense. Newton, on the contrary, stipulated an
absolute space as a universal frame of reference for his
physics, so that the velocity and position of a body have
a fixed meaning in and of itself, not only in relation to
other bodies, which violates the principle and is not an
operationally meaningful notion.

“The defining characteristic of Cartesian physics is its insistence on explaining everything in terms of contact mechanics.
Leibniz agreed completely: ‘A body is never moved naturally
except by another body that touches and pushes it . . . Any other

I SAAC N EWTON, The Author’s Preface to Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687); trans. Andrew Motte
(1729).

45

