DRIVING MISS DAISY

103

and P(A) = 0.01. Let us start with your accident probability P(A given S):
P(A given S) =

P(S given A) × P(A)
0.75 × 0.01
=
≈ 0.008
P(S)
0.95

so you have a 0.8% risk of having an accident. On the other hand, Daisy
has probability
P(A given D) =

0.25 × 0.01
P(D given A) × P(A)
=
= 0.05
P(D)
0.05

and with her 5% accident risk, she should, of course, be in the passenger
seat (or back seat preferably). She confuses the probabilities P(D given
A) with P(A given D), which is a common mistake. That drunk drivers
are responsible for 25% of the accidents is not a relevant figure until we
also know how many drunk drivers there are. As they make up much
less than 25% of the drivers, they are involved in disproportionally many
accidents.
Note that the probability that you are interested in, P(A given D),
would not be possible to compute directly from existing data based
on accident records. If you know how many accidents and how many
drivers there are, you can figure out how likely it is overall to have an
accident. From police records on breath and blood tests, you can figure
out how likely it is that somebody in an accident is drunk. There is,
however, no way to directly compute the probability that a drunk driver
has an accident because you have no record of those who don’t get into
accidents. Bayes’ rule helps you do precisely that, if you have some idea
about the proportion of drunk drivers (which may be learned from police
checkpoints where such are permitted or from surveys where people are
asked anonymously about their drinking and driving habits).
Confusion of a conditional probability in one direction with the conditional probability in the other direction is a common phenomenon. When
I was a young man, I liked to read Ed McBain’s detective stories about
the 87th precinct in the fictional city of Isola. I remember one episode of
an Italian-American who was disappointed that almost all Italians on a
particular TV show were portrayed as crooks. He wrote to the TV station
and voiced his complaints and got a reply that said something like, “That
is not true, we also have many criminals who are Jewish and Irish.” It was
pointed out in the book that the letter writer was clever enough to distinguish between the phrases “All Italians are crooks” and “All crooks

