7.6 Paracompleteness and Hierarchies: Field Vs. Tarski and Maudlin

139

Crucially, this is not a purely epistemic notion. If I write an obviously true “object
language” sentence on a chalkboard, and a very quiet and sneaky person manages to
erase it and replace it with “The sentence Ben Burgis is saying right now is false”
without alerting me in any way, then my witlessly paradoxical statement “The
sentence on the chalkboard is true” will be impermissible on Maudlin’s account.
Field ﬁnds this move unsatisfying.
This does indeed handle the problem of agreement and disagreement, but only by inventing
another notion to do the job that truth has been standardly thought to do. (Indeed, I suspect
that many people will regard their own conception of truth as closer to Maudlin’s conception
of objective permissibility than to Maudlin’s conception of truth.) And obviously, if we
allow a notion of objective permissibility in addition to truth then it will raise paradoxes of
its own: e.g., sentences that assert their own objective impermissibility. Maudlin of course is
well aware of this, and proposes a solution. In this case what he proposes is not a (T-OUT)
solution (or rather, a (Permissibility-OUT)) solution; instead, he offers a solution of a more
standardly Tarskian kind (Field 2008, p. 141).

What Field seems to mean by accusing Maudlin of Tarskianism is that Maudlin
ends up multiplying permissibility operators in a way that is reminiscent of Tarski’s
hierarchy of truth operators. It is worth noting that Maudlin goes out of his way to
deny this analogy. His view is that various rules for permissibility are all desirable
(some of which will, as Field suggest, look an awful lot like standard rules governing
our ordinary understanding of truth), but as the Rolling Stones have taught us you
can’t always have what you want. Given some of the hard choices between different
rules that cannot co-exist within the same set of rules without inconsistency, Maudlin
thinks that multiple distinct sets of rules will be equally satisfactory. Liar-like
sentences constructed with one sort of impermissibility operator might not be
impermissible relative to the set of rules deﬁning that operator, but can still be
impermissible relative to another set of rules. When he introduces his multiplicity of
permissibility operators, he stresses the ways in which the resulting picture is
un-Tarskian.
It is certainly correct that the language we have been discussing up to now is importantly
incomplete: it does not contain “permissibility predicates”, and must be expanded to include
them if it is to become as expressively rich as English. And it is also correct that expanding
the language to include these predicates will cause us some headaches. But [. . .] it is not so
obvious that much is gained by characterizing the expanded language as a metalanguage, at
least not if that tacitly suggests that there ought to be an even more expansive metametalanguage. [. . .W]e have expanded the language to include an inﬁnitude of such predicates, all at one fell swoop. And this collection of predicates does not, in any obvious way,
have a structure or form a hierarchy. There are not different “levels” of predicates (Maudlin
2004, pp. 170–171).

Putting aside the issue of whether Field’s charge of Tarskianism is a fair one, let
us ask a more basic question. Assuming for the sake of argument that Field is right to
say that (a) Maudlin can only disagree by introducing a new notion to do the work
that falsity normally does, and (b) Maudlin can only solve the paradoxes that arise
given this new notion with a move that looks distinctly Tarskian, and inherits many
of the problems of Tarskianism, does all this add up to a good reason to reject
Maudlin’s solution to the paradoxes?

