Logical Empiricism As Scientiﬁc Philosophy

25

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009471497 Published online by Cambridge University Press

It has become clear in recent scholarship that the connection drawn in the
Wissenschaftlicher Weltauffassung between logical empiricism and other modernist movements in education, architecture, and so forth was not simply
a matter of motivating rhetoric; it was a program of activity.15 Several Vienna
Circle members were teachers in experimental educational settings such as the
Vienna Hochschule, a generally socialist adult education project. Josef Frank,
the brother of Philipp, was a leading modernist architect in Vienna. Several
members of the Vienna Circle, including Feigl, Neurath, and Carnap, gave
lectures at the Dessau Bauhaus. Neurath was throughout his life fervently
involved in educational projects that incorporated what we would now call
“new information technologies” such as his ISOTYPE method for the visual
representation of scientiﬁc information. The same is true in Berlin of Hans
Reichenbach and his activities on radio. Neurath was also an urban planner,
museum curator, and, brieﬂy, a minister for economic rationalization in the
Soviet Republic of Bavaria.16 The Vienna Circle itself had a public outreach
arm in the Ernst Mach Society, which sponsored public lectures on topics in
science and scientiﬁc philosophy in Vienna. The manifesto makes plain that
such activities are not add-ons but essential to the philosophy on offer:
The Vienna Circle does not rest content with collective work as a closed
group. It is also trying to make contact with the active movements of the
present, insofar as they are well disposed toward the scientiﬁc worldconception and turn away from metaphysics and theology . . . The Vienna
Circle believes that in collaborating with the Ernst Mach Society it fulﬁlls
a demand of the day: we have to fashion intellectual tools for everyday life,
for the daily life of the scholar but also for the daily life of all those who in
some way join in working at the conscious reshaping of life. The vitality that
shows itself in the efforts for a rational transformation of the social and
economic order, permeates the movement for a scientiﬁc world-conception
also. (Neurath et al. [1929] 2012, p. 81)

In other passages in which the logical empiricists sought to motivate their
project, the focus is mainly on the internal reshaping of the discipline of
philosophy. The logical empiricists had a diagnosis of the lack of intellectual
authority from which philosophy suffered. It stemmed from an improper understanding of the nature of knowledge production. Philosophy had always, especially in metaphysical ages, been understood as the expression of a sort of
personal genius or special wisdom of the individual philosopher. In this philosophy was more like poetry or other creative arts than like science – yet
15
16

See especially the details of the activities of the Vienna Circle in Stadler (2015).
On Neurath, see Cartwright et al. (1996) and Cat and Tuboly (2019); for Reichenbach, see
Richardson (2021).

