mathematical individuals to be derivative from the existence and properties
of structures—so that e.g. the nature of the natural number 2 is exhausted
by the fact that it comes third in the successor relation 0−1−2−3−4−. . .—
has traded on logical methods. For instance: While first-order axiomatisations of arithmetic are provably incapable of excluding unintended interpretations of the symbols of arithmetic5 , there are second-order axiomatisations
of arithmetic—most famously, the system of the second-order (Dedekind)Peano axioms—which are provably categorical in the sense that every two
models of such a system of axioms are isomorphic to each other, that is,
have the same structure. This categoricity theorem, which was proven by
the German mathematician Richard Dedekind already in the 19th century,
and which may be called a model-theoretic theorem (model theory being a
part of logic again), explains therefore how and why we might be able to
get epistemic access to mathematical structures such as the one of the natural numbers: by their categorical second-order axiomatisations (see Shapiro
1997 for more on this).
Similarly, Nominalism about mathematics, according to which there are
no abstract objects at all even though mathematical theories may still be
used to shorten longish purely logical derivations of statements about the
physical world from other statements about the physical world, experienced
a much richer, more precise, and much more sophisticated revival by means of
logical theorems than it had ever had before in the traditional metaphysical
debates between Realists and Nominalists: Hartry Field’s Science Without
Numbers (Field 1980), which formulates physical theories without reference
to numbers on the basis of representation theorems that were once proven in
what one might now call the model theory of geometry, is the most famous
example.
But without doubt the most drastic impact that a logical result ever
had on a school in the philosophy of mathematics is the impact that Kurt
Gödel’s (1931) famous Incompleteness Theorems6 had on Formalism, which
5

There is a whole branch of mathematical logic which deals with such non-standard
models of arithmetic or with non-standard models of mathematical theories more generally.
6
Boolos, Burgess, and Jeffrey (2002) is a classical introduction to the theorems. Smith
(2009) is a recent and detailed reconstruction of the Incompleteness Theorems which is
accessible also to non-mathematicians. Hájek and Pudlák (1991) is recent mathematical
treatment of formal systems of first-order arithmetic in general. Raatikainen (2005) and
Torkel Franzén’s Gödel’s Theorem. An Incomplete Guide to Its Use and Abuse (Franzen
2005) give excellent surveys of the philosophical significance of the Incompleteness Theo-

4

