56

Philosophy and Logic

understand simplicity?102 Here the state of the debate within the philosophy of
logic is less developed than in the case of the notion of strength. One intuitive
way of characterizing simplicity is by means of avoidance of gerrymandered
concepts or ad hoc hypotheses to account for phenomena that could be equally
accounted for with more joint-carving concepts and avoiding the postulation of
ad hoc hypotheses. Ceteris paribus, if two theories can equally explain a given
set of phenomena but one theory, T1, uses more (or more gerrymandered)
theoretical resources than the other theory T2, then T2 is favored over T1.103
So for example, in science simple theories often have greater predictive power
than more complex ones, making it easier to foresee outcomes and design
experiments. Or, again, consider simplicity in its relation with the notion of
elegance:104 Scientists appreciate elegant theories that can explain a wide range
of phenomena with minimal assumptions or complexity, rather than theories
that are more complex and considered less elegant. Thus, a simpler theory can
be chosen for pragmatic reasons (it is easier to handle) or for aesthetic reasons
(it’s more elegant). However, perhaps the most signiﬁcant – and to some extent,
controversial – reason for favouring a simpler theory concerns considerations
regarding the relationship between simplicity and truth: ceteris paribus,
a simpler theory is taken to be more plausible (more probable, or with
a higher expected degree of predictive accuracy) than its less simple rivals.
The concept of simplicity poses notably intricate challenges in the philosophy of science, challenges that extend into the philosophy of logic as well. As
Quine has pointed out, there may be a tension between simplifying the ontology
and simplifying the ideology (as he calls it): roughly, postulating the existence
of more entities may make the formulation of the theory simpler,105 while
simplifying the ideology making the formulation of the theory simpler, may
require adding complexity to the ontology. And Ole Hjortland, writing about the
issue of simplicity as a theoretical virtue in logic writes:
A logic can be simple to use or simple to learn. It can be simple because it has
few rules, or few models, because it has proofs of low complexity or models
of low complexity. Some nonclassical logics have fewer rules than classical
logic, but more models. Does that make them simpler or more complex?

102

See Baker (2022) and Sober (2015) for a thorough discussion of the notion of simplicity.
As Holsinger observes, cases where competing theories offer equally good explanations of
a given phenomenon may be comparatively rare (Holsinger 1981).
104
On the relationship between the theoretical virtue of simplicity and the aesthetic virtue of
elegance, see Derkse (1992).
105
Ontological simplicity can be qualitative, having to do with the number of kinds of things
postulated, or merely quantitative, having to do with the number of individual things postulated.
Arguably, Quine’s point concerns qualitative simplicity.
103

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 177.249.162.188, on 23 May 2025 at 03:56:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009233897

