Chapter 2: Formal methods of evaluating arguments

2.1 What are formal methods of evaluation and why do we need them?
In chapter 1 we introduced the concept of validity and the informal test of
validity. According to that test, in order to determine whether an argument is
valid we ask whether we can imagine a scenario where the premises are true and
yet the conclusion is false. If we can, then the argument is invalid; if we can’t
then the argument is valid. The informal test relies on our ability to imagine
certain kinds of scenarios as well as our understanding of the statements
involved in the argument. Because not everyone has the same powers of
imagination or the same understanding, this informal test of validity is neither
precise nor objective. For example, while one person may be able to imagine a
scenario in which the premises of an argument are true while the conclusion is
false, another person may be unable to imagine such a scenario. As a result, the
argument will be classified as invalid by the first individual, but valid by the
second individual. That is a problem because we would like our standard of
evaluation of arguments (i.e., validity) to be as precise and objective as possible,
and it seems that our informal test of validity is neither. It isn’t precise because
the concept of being able to imagine x is not precise—what counts as imagining
x is not something that can be clearly specified. What are the precise success
conditions for having imagined a scenario where the premises are true and the
conclusion is false? But the informal test of validity also isn’t objective since it is
possible that two different people who applied the imagination test correctly
could come to two different conclusions about whether the argument is valid.
As I noted before, this is partly because people’s understanding of the
statements differ and partly because people have different powers of
imagination.
The goal of a formal method of evaluation is to eliminate any imprecision or lack
of objectivity in evaluating arguments. As we will see by the end of this chapter,
logicians have devised a number of formal techniques that accomplish this goal
for certain classes of arguments. What all of these formal techniques have in
common is that you can apply them without really having to understand the
meanings of the concepts used in the argument. Furthermore, you can apply
the formal techniques without having to utilize imagination at all. Thus, the
formal techniques we will survey in this chapter help address the lack of
precision and objectivity inherent in the informal test of validity. In general, a
formal method of evaluation is a method of evaluation of arguments that does
not require one to understand the meaning of the statements involved in the
argument. Although at this point this may sound like gibberish, after we have

50

