https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009471497 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Logical Empiricism As Scientiﬁc Philosophy

49

activities were in the service of getting a democratic polity to be able to deploy
scientiﬁc ﬁndings in their policy choices.22
It is, moreover, clear that quite a bit of the impetus to reject metaphysics among
the Vienna Circle members and in Berlin came from social concerns.
Metaphysics was seen not simply as nonsense, but as a form of socially repressive
nonsense, as stories that lacked meaning but served to prop up regimes of power
and to obscure the true workings of the natural and social worlds. As the nods in
the direction of the eighteenth-century French Encyclopedists served to indicate,
this meant that logical empiricism had a sort of Enlightenment ambition in which
the acquisition of reliable knowledge was understood as an intrinsic social good.
Even more clearly, it aligned the logical empiricists with a modernist sensibility
about the rationalization of social life, the promise of applied science, and the
rejection of inherited but no longer pertinent social forms and roles. Vienna and
Berlin were leading centers of progressive modernism in the German-speaking
world during the interwar era; the scientiﬁc philosophy on offer from those
centers was very much of a piece with this general tendency. This was reinforced
also in the various joint projects the logical empiricists engaged in with groups
like the Dessau Bauhaus and in the early adoption of new information technologies by, for example, Reichenbach, who appeared regularly on German radio to
discuss science.23
Perhaps the way in which exclusive attention to theses or even to theses and
methods in discussing logical empiricism is most inadequate is how much it
underplays what we might call philosophical attitude as it is informed by the
scientiﬁc ethos. Both in their motivational texts and, according to those they
interacted with, the logical empiricists emphasized a philosophical approach
that owed much to the attitude of scientists as they approached problems or
questions. This attitude often impressed their students. Here is a characteristic
account of her time as a graduate student of Reichenbach at the University of
California–Los Angeles authored by Ruth Anna Putnam:
He was an excellent teacher, of course; but he managed to do something
which went beyond that. This was an undergraduate course and the material
covered was not anything on which he was currently working; nevertheless
he managed to give us the sense of participating in intellectual discovery. He
did that partly by asking the right kinds of questions, questions which would
force us to try to solve a problem before he presented the solution. But he did
it also by telling stories, that is to say by making the situation in which the
question would arise vividly real. (Putnam 1978, p. 62)
22
23

See Cartwright et al. (1996) and Reisch (2005).
On Enlightenment, see Uebel (2004) and Carus (2007); on modernism, see Richardson (2017,
2021).

