I am not provable in S.
Gödel derives the existence of G from a general fixed-point lemma (also called
diagonalization lemma), which says that for every formula A[x] in LS with
one free variable x14 , there exists a sentence in LS again that says about
itself (or about a sentence that is provably equivalent to itself) that it has
the property that is expressed by A[x]. The proof of this lemma is actually
constructive, that is, Gödel constructs the fixed-point formula in question by
a concrete procedure that could be run on a computer given the input A[x].
If A[x] is chosen to be ¬Prov S (x), then this yields the existence of G above.
The sentence G is reminiscent of the famous “Liar” sentence which says
I am not true.
and which seems to lead to a contradiction by means of the following bit
of informal reasoning: Assume the Liar sentence is true; then what it says
must be the case; but what it says is that it is not true. So we have: If
the Liar sentence is true, then it is not true. Now assume the Liar sentence
is not true: but that is exactly what it says; so it must be true after all.
So we also have: If the Liar sentence is not true, then it is true. Summing
up, this yields: the Liar sentence is true if and only if it is not true. But
that is a logical contradiction in classical logic. There is now a whole area
in philosophical logic called ‘formal theories of truth’, which deals with the
Liar paradox and with ways of avoiding its contradictory consequences. In
spite of the similarity between the Liar sentence and Gödel’s sentence G
above, it is important to realize that the two are very different still: First of
all, while the Liar sentence includes a truth predicate, which is a semantic
predicate, Gödel’s sentence G includes a provability predicate for some formal
system, where provability in that system is not a semantic but a syntactic
notion, or, via coding: an arithmetical notion. Indeed, G is but a sentence
in the language LS that says something about natural numbers and their
arithmetical properties or relationships or operations, even when we know
that qua coding G says something about its own unprovability. Secondly,
while the Liar seems to commit us to the proof of a contradiction, Gödel’s
sentence G does not: for instance, take S to be elementary arithmetic itself;
then if S is consistent, which no one doubts, S neither derives G nor ¬G.
Since, in particular, G is not derivable in S, G is actually a true statement.
14

Free means: not in the range of a quantifier expression ∃x or ∀x.

17

