Logic and Science

27

discussion will advance our understanding, particularly in the context of the
anti-exceptionalism debate.
It seems fair to say that the debate on logical anti-exceptionalism has, until
now, been characterized by limited and sometimes vague discussions about the
supposed scientiﬁc status or the anti-exceptional nature of logic. In fact, in
examining the current state of the debate, it is clear that many logicians and
philosophers of logic readily suggest that logic closely resembles a science.
However, they often hesitate to delve into discussions about what it precisely
means for logic to be considered a science. Regardless of the current state of the
debate in the philosophy of logic, we maintain that the question of whether, and
to what extent, logic qualiﬁes as a science is not only philosophically signiﬁcant
but also important and inherently complex. Consequently, it warrants a more
focused and detailed discussion. That being said, it is important to clarify that
the primary aim of discussing demarcation criteria in relation to logical antiexceptionalism is not to argue that a sensible anti-exceptionalist stance on logic
requires a strict set of criteria for distinguishing science from non-science.
Rather, the goal is to show that a more nuanced understanding of these criteria
and their interconnections offers a clearer picture of what it means to be an antiexceptionalist about logic, and to what extent.
To begin with, we take it that when we inquire into whether and to what extent
logic is a science, we end up engaging with three, undoubtedly intricate, issues
at once, namely: (i) the issue of what counts as logic (i.e.: how do we demarcate
logic from non-logic?); (ii) the issue of what counts as science (i.e.: how do we
demarcate science from non-science?); (iii) the issue of whether logic meets
(some or all of) the demarcation criteria for being a science (i.e.: does logic
qualify as a science?). The plan for this section and the subsequent two is thus to
discuss these three questions and to provide some useful indication concerning
how to address them in relation to the aim of advancing the debate on antiexceptionalism about logic. Let’s start with the issue of how to demarcate
science from non-science.

3.2 Demarcation Problems in Science
“Science” is one of those terms that we, as competent users of a natural
language living in a society heavily relying on technological and scientiﬁc
knowledge, are all acquainted with. We inherently grasp an intuitive, though
somewhat vague, distinction between what qualiﬁes as science and what does
40

40

Contrary to the usage by Boudry (2017: 38) and Hansson (2013: 63–65), who employ “science”
as a broad equivalent to the German concept “Wissenschaft” encompassing all academic
research ﬁelds, we will limit our use of “science” to primarily denote the natural sciences.
This aligns with the conventional understanding of the term in British and American English.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 177.249.162.188, on 23 May 2025 at 03:56:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009233897

