

volume 20, no. 1
january 2020



Learning Through
Simulation

Sara Aronowitz & Tania Lombrozo
Princeton University

© 2020 Sara Aronowitz & Tania Lombrozo
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0 License.
<www.philosophersimprint.org/020001/>

Introduction
Imagine that you have two cylindrical glasses of the same height,
where one is wide and one is thin. Each glass is filled with water to the
same height. If you slowly tip both glasses over at the same rate, which
glass will spill water first? Or will they both spill water when tipped to
the very same angle?
This challenge — known as the “water-pouring problem” (Schwartz
& Black, 1999) — is often answered incorrectly. But if people are invited to imagine holding out their hands (as if holding both glasses), to
close their eyes, and to mentally rotate their hands until they think
the water would spill, they often produce the correct response: that
water from the wide glass will spill first. Call this activity of answering
a query by imagining and then evaluating the output of one’s imagination mental simulation.
The exercise of simulation just described looks like a way of learning
something new. Construed in this way, it is a lot like learning through
observation. But it’s also natural to say that this kind of learning doesn’t
rely on acquiring any new information. Described like this, it is a lot like
learning through inference.
How does learning through simulation support learning? And
what, if anything, is epistemically distinctive about learning through
simulation? Can learning through simulation be reduced to learning
through observation or through inference?
This paper aims to make progress on these questions. We argue
that mental simulation cannot be reduced to observation or inference, though it shares important similarities with both. On our account, mental simulation is distinctive in two ways. First, simulation is
a method that can support learning some proposition q (the output of
the simulation) even when the basis for that output is opaque to the
learner. Second, through repeated simulation, the learner can reduce
this opacity, supporting the acquisition of more accurate models of the
world. This allows us to see why (and under what conditions) simulation is an essential part of learning from what we already know.

