sara aronowitz & tania lombrozo

Learning Through Simulation

move is insufficient to accomplish our original goal: to explain how
mental simulation can be used to learn about the world. In the waterpouring problem, the query answered through simulation was which
glass would in fact spill first, not something about a mental model.
But the view that simulation answers queries about our mental models could be supplemented to include an additional step: something
like an inference connecting the internal observation to a proposition
about the external world. For instance, in the water-pouring case, one
would first observe that one’s motor model “expects” the wider glass
to spill first, and then infer based on the reliability of this model that
the wider glass would in actuality spill first. In other words, learning
through simulation could be reduced to a form of learning through
observation (of one’s internal model) followed by an instance of learning through inference (in which this internal observation figures in an
inference about the external world).
We think this approach is problematic for several reasons. First, recall that we characterized learning through observation as a transition
involving a relationship of external evidential support. This relationship would need to be modified to account for how one part of the
mind could stand in the right (external?) relationship to another for
this relationship (or a close analog) to obtain. The idea that one part of
the mind performs a simulation, while another observes it, is uncomfortably homuncular, but perhaps not fatal. Our second worry involves
the subsequent inferential step. An inference from an internal model
to the external world would require (perhaps implicit) knowledge
of what justifies the model’s output. While some commitment concerning the relationship between the model and the world may often
ground uses of simulation in science (see, e.g., Weisberg, 2013, on the
role of models in science), it seems too demanding to require this of

most mental simulation. As we elaborate below, it is characteristic of
learning through simulation that we lack access to such commitments.
A final worry about this strategy is that it breaks up what looks like
a single process into a series of fully distinct and epistemically independent steps. Doing so leaves us with the problem of explaining why
these steps would be taken in sequence, and what relates them to each
other. In sum, the strategy of reducing simulation to an internal observation followed by an inference seems to stretch our understanding
of both observation and inference, and to miss what’s epistemically
distinctive about learning through simulation.
4. Simulation as Learning through Inference
An alternative way to approach simulation is to treat it as a form of
learning through inference. By inference, we’ll cast a wide net to include deductive and inductive reasoning, as well as abductive inference.8 Crucially, ‘inference’ here picks out a cognitive act rather than a
relation between propositions, following Harman’s (1986) distinction
between inference and implication. As with the reduction to observation, this reduction would explain how simulation can result in learning by appealing to learning mechanisms that are better understood.
The project of reducing simulation to inference has several appealing features. First, like inference, simulation seems to rely on no
external input; inference is the canonical form of learning from what
you already know. A second promising element is that inference has
a well-defined formal structure. One might think that what is distinctive about inference is that it involves the sort of process we can write
down in the form of premises and a conclusion. If there were a parallel
structure of premises and conclusion hidden in cases of simulation,
this would be tremendously explanatory of the conditions for success
and failure when it comes to learning through simulation.9

the role of providing phenomenal evidence as well as what she calls physical evidence (evidence about the way things are). Of these two roles, simulation can play the former, but not the latter. Other views similarly suggest
that imagination can be a similar process to perception, but directed towards
different subject matters. For example, Williamson (2016) takes the line that
imagination gives us access to modal facts.

philosophers’ imprint

8. On some views, abduction includes induction, and on others, the reverse
may be true.
9. Norton (1991) argues along similar lines that thought experiments have a
hidden argumentative structure, and so count as arguments for epistemic

–  7  –

vol. 20, no. 1 (january 2020)

