assuming that the betting quotients behave like frequencies—that is,
that they conform with the axioms of the probability calculus. Thus, one
should not think that the assumption of fair betting quotients is an innocent background assumption. It does not merely provide a context in
which Dutch book argumentation can prove that credences must conform
with the axioms of the probability calculus. Rather, conformity with those
axioms is already tacitly presumed by them. All the Dutch book argumentation does is to make that conformity visible.
This outcome may be untroubling to someone who already believes
that credences must be probabilistic. Why be troubled by a demonstration that just clarifies the probabilist’s commitments? If, however, you are
someone like me who does not believe that credences must be probabilistic, you will find this result damning. What was supposed to be a demonstration of the incoherence of non-probabilistic beliefs turns out to be an
exercise in circularity. Probabilities are demonstrable simply because they
were introduced covertly in an assumption of the argument at the outset.

10.13.5. The Regresses Begin
The prediction of the general analyses above is that recognition of weaknesses in an attempted proof of probabilities leads to a regress. One form
is a successive weakening of what is sought to be proved. This form of
regress is well underway for Dutch book arguments; for it has been long
recognized in the literature that the assumption of fairness is arbitrary
and can be discarded without compromise to the rationality of the enterprise. This recognition is at least a half century old, extending as far back
as Cedric Smith (1961). It is the basis of the analysis of Walley’s (1991)
treatise Statistical Reasoning with Imprecise Probabilities.
Following Walley (1991, p. 28), it may be quite prudent for an agent to
refuse to admit any bet over some proposition A as fair. Rather, the agent
may be willing to accept a bet “on” A with a maximum betting quotient of
qlower and be willing to accept a bet “against” A with a minimum betting
quotient of qupper. If the two are equal, then they comprise a fair bet over
A. If qlower < qupper, then the agent is more cautious in the agent’s betting
behavior. No Dutch book can be made against such an agent. The agent’s
belief in A is no longer a single probability but an interval bounded by a
lower probability equal to qlower and an upper probability equal to qupper.
10 | Why Not Bayes

373

