direction is what is measured in many foundational thought experiments
in quantum mechanics.
The major disanalogy between spinning tops and electrons with spin
is that there is nothing rotating or spinning inside the electron. An electron carries angular momentum in the same way that it carries electric
charge, as a fundamental, irreducible property. There is no deeper story
about some hidden, spinning machinery that explains how the angular
momentum comes about. It is just there.

16.4. Two Inductive Inference Problems for Electrons
The background facts fix the inductive logic appropriate to some domain.
We can find situations involving electrons in which a familiar probabilistic induction is the appropriate one; and we can find situations in which
it is not.

16.4.1. Uncertainty over Randomly Selected Positions
Here is an example of the first type that can be handled with ordinary
probabilistic inferences. Assume that we have six widely spaced boxes,
numbered one to six, and that an electron has been placed in just one of
them. We do not know which contains the electron. We will choose one
box at random and consider the outcome that this is the box containing
the electron. How much inductive support is accrued to this outcome? To
ensure that we have background facts that authorize probabilistic reasoning, assume that we choose the box whose number matches the outcome
of a roll of an ordinary die. The die’s behavior, we assume, is governed by
the probability calculus in the usual way.
A probabilistic inductive logic is warranted by the set up. The evidence just presented affords inductive support at the level of a probability
of 1/6 that the box selected contains the electron. All possible outcomes
fall under a single probability measure. While this is obvious, this simple
feature is worth noting, since it will fail in the quantum problems to be
considered below. However, so far, no quantum peculiarity has entered.6

6
(For experts) No quantum entanglement over different boxes is assumed. The spatial
support of the electron’s wave function is presumed to be fully contained within just one box.

620

The Material Theory of Induction

