naturalism and ontology

37

to express our best physical theories, for he thinks that there is a presumption
in science of supervenience, such that, although the concepts of ordinary
language and of special sciences other than physics may also allow for useful
ways of describing and understanding the world, the truth of utterances
within those theories should ultimately supervene on matters of physical
fact. Thus, in answering the question of why ‘this special deference to
physical theory?’ Quine (1978: 98) responds:
The answer is not that everything worth saying can be translated into the technical
vocabulary of physics; not even all good science can be translated into that
vocabulary. The answer is rather this: nothing happens in the world, not the
ﬂutter of an eyelid, not the ﬂicker of a thought, without some redistribution of
microphysical states. It is usually hopeless and pointless to determine just what
microphysical states lapsed and what ones supervened in the event, but some
reshufﬂing at that level there had to be; physics can settle for no less. If the
physicist suspected there was any event that did not consist in a redistribution of
the elementary states allowed for by his physical theory, he would seek a way of
supplementing his theory. Full coverage in this sense is the very business of physics,
and only of physics.

Whether or not Quine is right about this presumption of supervenience
is not particularly important as regards our own application of the naturalistic approach to answer ontological questions about whether there
are mathematical objects. Since, as we have already noted, existentially
quantiﬁed claims whose truth would require the existence of mathematical
objects already appear in our current best physical theories, whether we
follow Quine in focusing on the existentially quantiﬁed claims of our best
physics, or go further to allow existentially quantiﬁed claims made in the
context of other theories also to be ontologically signiﬁcant, either way we
will ﬁnd ourselves faced with statements whose truth would require the
existence of mathematical objects.
The only situation in which a focus on physics might be thought to cause
special problems is if we thought that the existentially quantiﬁed utterances
of pure mathematics should be viewed as ontologically signiﬁcant. For in
that case, even if we found a way of rejecting the Quinean conclusion
that our best physical theories give us reason to believe in mathematical
objects, the presence of utterances whose truth would require the existence
of mathematical objects in our best expressions of our pure mathematical
theories would mean that we would still ﬁnd ourselves committed to

