204

PA RT II : O T H E R C O N T R I B U T I O N S

claim is that our best explanations involve an appeal to mathematical entities in a
way that is relevantly similar. So the scientific realist who accepts IBE should also
accept the existence of mathematical entities. If this style of argument could be
vindicated, then Colyvan would be able to achieve something that was missing from
his book. This was to move from the acceptance of a claim like “There are numbers”
in our best theories to the conclusion that mathematical entities exist. As I have presented things, he would be able to move from a realism in truth-value to a platonist
conclusion.
Critics of the explanatory indispensability argument (such as Melia) have argued
that there really are no mathematical explanations of physical phenomena. 2 After
reviewing this debate, I conclude that both sides have severe limitations. First, after
clarifying what the existence of such mathematical explanations requires, I argue
that these explanations do in fact exist. Second, I object that Colyvan and Baker have
not presented an adequate account of the ways mathematics contributes explanatory
power. But third, against Melia, I claim that this does not mean that mathematics
plays a merely “indexing” or “representational” role. This is based on the now-familiar point that we often lack any knowledge of what the mathematics is representing.
Finally, I endorse a complaint made by Melia that IBE fails to justify mathematical
truths when they appear in a scientific explanation. But I argue that this difference
between unobservables and mathematical entities is related to the special character
of mathematical truths in a way that is different than Melia.
The first step is to establish the existence of mathematical explanations of physical
phenomena. The issue can be clarified in at least two ways. First, we may wonder if
any explanations make use of a mathematical claim. A mathematical claim here is
just any statement about a mathematical domain. I propose a simple replacement
test to answer this sort of question. Starting with an explanation that involves a
mathematical concept or theorem, the test involves considering what happens if this
concept or theorem is removed. If the resulting argument is no longer an explanation
or else has less explanatory power, then I conclude that the mathematical concept
or theorem is making an explanatory contribution to the original explanation. But
this is not the only sense in which mathematical explanations of physical phenomena
may exist. A second way to proceed is to ask if a mathematical claim allows a scientific
explanation that has greater explanatory power than would be available otherwise.
The replacement test is not sufficient to answer this sort of question. What is needed
is what I call a comparison test. This test considers all available explanations of the
phenomena at issue. If the explanation that uses the mathematical claim has the
greatest explanatory power, then we have a mathematical explanation in this second
sense. The comparison test is clearly the test that is relevant to an application of
IBE. It is only the best explanation that is a candidate for the use of this inferential
principle.
In many explanations offered in contemporary science we find mathematical
claims. As we often lose the explanation if the mathematical claim is removed, the

2. See Melia (2000), Melia (2002) and Daly and Langford (2009). I have also benefited from Saatsi
(2011).

