Mathematics and Explanation

69

Looking back, then, at premise 2, we have a better understanding of why it is so
unpersuasive to the determined nominalist. We need to address Saatsi’s challenge
to relate the presence of mathematical explanations to the ontological commitment to abstract mathematical objects. But we have not found an account of these
mathematical explanations that avoids a resolute representational reading while
also clarifying what it is about these explanations that ties them to the existence of
abstract objects. Even if the determined nominalist admits the class of mathematical explanations endorsed by Lange, they still have available an ontology of
properties that stops short of commitment to abstract objects. It seems, then, that
a platonist interpretation of mathematics in terms of abstract objects is disconnected from the explanatory role of mathematics outside of mathematics.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

5.3 Inference to the Best Mathematical Explanation
Colyvan and Baker have often emphasized that an explanatory indispensability
argument is directed at scientiﬁc realists. Scientiﬁc realists typically defend
their realism about unobservable entities like atoms and electrons through the
use of inference to the best explanation (IBE). So, it is claimed, the scientiﬁc
realist should also accept the existence of platonic mathematical objects using
the very same sort of IBE argument. As Baker puts the point, “A crucial plank of
the scientiﬁc realist position involves inference to the best explanation (IBE) to
justify the postulation in particular cases of unobservable theoretical entities . . .
the indispensability debate only gets off the ground if both sides take IBE
seriously, which suggests that explanation is of key importance in this debate”
(Baker 2005, p. 225). On this reading, premise 1 reﬂects an endorsement of an
appropriate form of IBE. Then the existence of the genuine mathematical
explanations required for premise 2 gets us the existence of abstract mathematical objects. For the very same explanatory considerations that speak in favor of
atoms and electrons also speak in favor of numbers and groups.
It turns out to be difﬁcult to articulate and defend a form of IBE that supports
a plausible form of scientiﬁc realism as well as mathematical platonism. To
appreciate the challenges, consider a classic explanatory argument for the
existence of God popular from the beginning of the nineteenth century. What
explains the existence of the universe and the apparent design that we ﬁnd in
some natural objects like living things? The best available explanation of these
facts in 1800 was that God created the universe and is directly responsible for
these features of living things through various acts of special creation. So, if we
accept IBE, then it looks like we should also accept the existence of God. In
schematic form, IBE is a form of inference that can be boiled down to premise
(A) and conclusion (B):

