https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Mathematics and Explanation

15

A stands in some special explanatory relevance relation to B.16 Our genuineness
principle assumes that some cases have mathematics in the explanation, and yet
the mathematics is not standing in the appropriate explanatory relation because
it is representing the explainers. A monist approach makes it hard to see what
the mathematics is doing in such explanations. More importantly, many relations that monists examine seem to preclude mathematics from standing in that
relation to targets. So, a monist risks ruling out genuine mathematical explanations altogether (Zelcer 2013; Kuorikoski 2021).
This challenge is easy to appreciate for the main versions of a causal account of
explanation. A causal account ﬁrst says what causes are and then clariﬁes how
explanations relate to causes. In broad strokes, the three main approaches to causal
explanation can be traced back to Salmon, Lewis, and Woodward. Salmon argued
that causes are a type of process (Salmon 1984). So we can explain something by
describing a causal process that led up to its occurrence. Salmon had a somewhat
restricted notion of a causal process tied to physics, but more recently the so-called
new mechanists have extended the basic approach so that it is more ﬂexible. One
summary statement of this mechanist approach is “Mechanisms are entities and
activities organized such that they are productive of regular changes from start or
set-up to ﬁnish or termination conditions” (Machamer et al. 2000, p. 3). Our
ﬂagpole case would then involve a mechanism associated with the transmission of
light. Mathematics can function to represent mechanisms, but it is only the
mechanisms themselves that are explanatory. The attempted explanation of the
height of the ﬂagpole via the length of the shadow then fails because there is no
mechanism that is “productive” in this direction.
David Lewis’ inﬂuential work on causal explanation aspires to characterize
causes in terms of counterfactuals. One simple proposal is that event C causes
event E just in case that were C not to have occurred, then E would not have
occurred. However, this simple proposal is vulnerable to a number of counterexamples. Suppose S throws a rock (C) that breaks a window (E), but that were
S not to have thrown her rock, then B would have thrown his rock (C’) and broken
the window (E). In such a case, C causes E, and yet it is not the case that were
C not to have occurred, then E would not occur, as were C not to have occurred,
the backup C’ would have occurred and brought about E. To handle this worry
and other objections Lewis required that a cause be connected to an effect through
a series of intermediate events in a special way: small counterfactual variations in
the cause go along with small counterfactual variations in some intermediate
events and in the effect (Lewis 2004, p. 91). For example, S’s throwing of the
rock, the actual cause, is connected to the breaking by intermediate events such as
16

See Pincock (2018) for more discussion of this approach.

