https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

44

The Philosophy of Mathematics

can be used to explain the possibility or impossibility of a given construction.
However, as an abstract explanatory proof, this involves some loss of control
over how to actually carry out a given construction. The proof provides
a uniform criterion for possible constructions and yet does not provide any
uniform method for carrying out a given construction. Similarly, there is
a uniform criterion for impossible constructions, but this does not sufﬁce to
prove that a given construction is impossible.
This loss of control creates a problem for Lange: when he discusses this sort of
case, he denies that an explanatory classiﬁcation may treat the objects classiﬁed in
different ways. This is because Lange supposes that the salient feature of an
explanatory classiﬁcation is the unity of the various parts of the classiﬁcation. If
unity is the salient feature, then to be explanatory “the proof must exploit some
other, similar respect in which those cases are alike and must proceed from there
to arrive at the result by treating all of the (classes of) cases in exactly the same
way” (Lange 2017, p. 287). Consider, then, two possible constructions, for
example bisecting an angle and constructing a square on a line segment, and
two impossible constructions, for example trisecting an angle and squaring
a circle. Bisecting an angle and constructing a square are uniﬁed by their
possibility, while trisecting an angle and squaring a circle are uniﬁed by their
impossibility. But our proof of the theorem involving degrees of ﬁeld extensions
does not afford a uniﬁed treatment of the constructions it classiﬁes. We establish
that the possible constructions are possible, but to show how the constructions
work, additional speciﬁc steps need to be carried out. The same point holds for the
other kind of construction: we can establish that the impossible constructions are
impossible, but additional features of the points and their coordinates are needed
to show this impossibility. For example, for trisecting the angle, one proof
involves features of the cosine function. By contrast, to show that we cannot
construct a square with the same area as a circle, we need to investigate the
features of pi. In particular, if we show that pi is not an algebraic number (i.e. not
the solution to any polynomial equation of any degree), then we have shown that
no ﬁeld extension that includes pi has the right degree (Stewart 2004, pp. 81–82).
The upshot is that Lange is not able to endorse our classiﬁcation of ruler-andcompass constructions as explanatory. He does not allow for explanatory classiﬁcations where there is a generic reason for some outcome across a range of cases,
and yet that generic reason has to be supplemented with case-speciﬁc reasons.53
Lange does allow that explanatory proofs differ in degree in a way that is tied
to how effectively the salient feature of the theorem is traced back to that feature
53

Lange also suggests that explanatory classiﬁcations may have a contrast as the salient feature, but
I do not think this avoids the basic worry I have raised. See Lange (2017, pp. 263–264, fn. 23).

