Mathematics and Metaphilosophy

21

they are true (which would be to speak of mathematical entities – namely,
symbol types).48 For example, all instances of the Subsets Axiom schema
would get expressed as follows: # ΦðzÞð ∃ yÞðxÞðx 2 y
! ðx 2 z & ΦÞÞ:
On Field’s account, if AXT is the conjunction of the axioms of a mathematical
theory, T, then what we really know is that <> AXT and that ½ðAXT ! PÞ, for
“proved” theorems, P. Thus, a difﬁculty facing this position is to explain why
reasoning about models and proofs is so useful in metalogic, given that it is not
really about proofs or models. We infer that <> AXT from the premise that AXT
has a model. And we infer that e <> AXT from the premise there is a proof of
ðP & ePÞ from AXT . How can Field explain this? He makes an argument
inspired by Kreisel’s “squeezing” argument (Kreisel [1967b]). Using Field’s
symbolism, the squeezing argument is as follows:
1. If ½ðP ! QÞ, then every model of P is a model of Q.
2. If there is a proof from P to Q (in some standard ﬁrst-order proof system),
then ½ðP ! QÞ:
3. Gödel’s Completeness Theorem: If every model of P is a model of Q, then
there is a proof from P to Q.
4. So, ½ðP ! QÞ just in case there is a proof of Q from P, just in case every
model of P is a model of Q. (Logical necessity is coextensive with truth in all
models and derivability.)
Field cannot accept this argument, however. According to him, we do not
know that (1)–(3) are (non-vacuously) true! In order to explain the usefulness of
proofs and models, Field reasons as follows:
1. If ½ðP ! QÞ, then ½ð AXZFC ! ½every model of P is a model of QÞ.
2. If ½ðAXZFC ! ½There is a proof from P to QÞ; then ½ðP ! QÞ.
3. ½ðAXZFC ! ð½every model of P is a model of Q ! ½There is a proof
from P to QÞÞ.
4. So, given that <> AXZFC ; ½ðP ! QÞ just in case ½ðAXZFC ! ½every model
of P is a model of Q Þ, just in case ½ðAXZFC ! ½There is a proof
from P to QÞ.
The problem with Field’s position is that once we give up on intrinsicality, we
are left with the reliability challenge as the motivation for nominalism.49 But the
reliability of our belief in, say, <>(ZFC) does not appear to be any easier to explain
Field actually focuses on the ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory, NBG. But he needs a device for inﬁnite
conjunction in any event. So I continue to speak of ZFC because it has already been introduced.
49
The justiﬁcatory challenge for realism about speciﬁcally scientiﬁcally inapplicable mathematics
might also seem to favor nominalism. But, in Section 3.5, we will see that the justiﬁcatory (and
reliability) challenge for mathematical realism can arguably be reduced to that for arithmetic
realism.
48

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108993937 Published online by Cambridge University Press

