explaining the success of mathematics

225

9.2. Is the Predictive Success of Fictionalist Science
a Miracle?
One crucial aspect of scientiﬁc practice is our ability to make predictions
based on our scientiﬁc theories. If one’s view of one’s theoretical hypotheses
made it implausible that such hypotheses should yield good predictions, then
one would not, in good faith, be able to rely on those theories in guiding
one’s expectations. The past predictive success of our scientiﬁc theories,
and our ready reliance on those theories in making future predictions, thus
provide a challenge to those who adopt an attitude to those theories that
falls short of belief. Why, it will be asked, should someone who doesn’t
believe that a given theory is true (or at least approximately true) expect that
theory to be predictively successful in the future? And how can someone
who doesn’t believe a theory that is known to have had past predictive
successes explain why that theory has been so successful? These questions
are really two sides of the same coin, and form the basis for the ‘no miracles’
argument in favour of scientiﬁc realism.
According to the ‘no miracles’ argument, the predictive successes of
our scientiﬁc theories should come as no surprise to scientiﬁc realists: for,
if our theories are true, their consequences, and hence their predictions
concerning observable phenomena, will also be true. By contrast, antirealists will have some work to do if they are to account for the predictive
successes of our scientiﬁc theories. Maybe there is room for some antirealists to reject the need for an explanation of past theoretical successes.
But at the very least, advocates of anti-realist attitudes to science will need
to account for their reliance on our current theories in making future
predictions that they expect to turn out to be true. And if they do not
believe those theories, then what considerations can they utilize to account
for their expectation that their theories will be predictively successful? The
realist suggests that no such considerations can do the job: that, if one
denies the truth or approximate truth of our scientiﬁc theories, then their
success in predictions is nothing short of a miracle.
The most well-known presentation of the ‘no miracles’ argument for
realism is Putnam’s (1975: 73), where he boldly makes the claim that
it is only on the assumption that ‘terms in mature scientiﬁc theories
typically refer . . . that the theories accepted in a mature science are typically

