CONSTRUCTION, MODALITY, LOGIC

197

We have seen that in the official model-theoretic semantics of mathematical languages, a domain of discourse is a static collection. This suggests that the result of
formalizing a branch of (classical) mathematics is always a static system, regardless
of whether the branch as practiced is dynamic or static. In other words, the metamathematical study of a structure seems to require that it be recast in static terms. A dynamic system is more conducive to developing and communicating insights about
the places and relations of a structure, insights internal to the structure; but in order
to take a broader perspective and develop and communicate insights about the structure itself—how it relates to other structures, what the correct logic for studying it is,
and so on—one prefers a static reformulation. The important point is that it is one
and the same structure.
The conclusion, thus far, is that some dynamic systems are structure-equivalent
to static ones or, in other words, some dynamic systems exemplify the same structure as static ones. However, not every dynamic system shares a structure with a static
one. To put it differently, some dynamic systems are not structure-equivalent to any
static system, at least not in any obvious or straightforward manner. This conclusion
is a corollary of the present thesis that ontology, inference, and construction are intimately related.
Consider, for example, intuitionistic arithmetic, a paradigm example of a dynamic
system. To start a reductio, suppose that P were a static system that is structureequivalent to intuitionistic arithmetic. What would P be like? Presumably, its objects would constitute a countable set (putting the domain of proofs aside). Thus, we
might as well identify the domain of P with the natural numbers. The relations of P
would have the defining conditions of the ordinary successor, addition and multiplication functions, the less-than relation, and the like. In short, then, P has the same
elements and relations as classical arithmetic. It is hard to avoid the conclusion that
P is isomorphic to the classical natural-number structure, in which case it exemplifies the same structure. Yet, one might suggest that, by hypothesis, P does not exemplify the classical natural-number structure, because P has a different logic. The
law of excluded middle does not apply to P.
There is the rub. In making the identification, we gloss over the distinction between potential infinity and actual infinity. The problem, on the surface, is one internal to structuralism: what is the most natural relationship between logic and the (admittedly relative) structure/system dichotomy? Yet, the situation is a manifestation
of a deep issue concerning the status or priority of logic. The crux of the problem
concerns the extent to which “objects” are independent of the way they are constructed
and studied. As indicated in the previous section, my view is that with dynamic discourse, the sorts of objects studied by a branch of mathematics—the sorts of structures—are determined by the allowed constructions and sanctioned inferences. In
short, the logic and the objects share a common source: the permissions and the pos-

system has the same structure as the classical one, then on my view there is no relevant difference
between the two systems—they exemplify the same structure. This question of ontological commitment is revisited in chapter 7.

