Discover y

179

the target system in virtue of the additional mathematics in play and the requirement
that a given structural relationship obtain. In our complex potential case, we saw
how the intricate mathematical structure associated with the analytic functions and
the complex plane became relevant to the fluid flow in virtue of the requirement
that the flow be irrotational. This is an unexpected and highly fruitful association.
To understand it we need to review the mathematics of the case and see how the
content arises from the initial referential assignments and structural associations.
With this background in place, we can see clearly how this apparatus can contribute
to an accurate description of such phenomena, but there is no reasonable demand
that all mathematical concepts in play be “reduced,” as Steiner puts it, to physical
analogues.
In the absence of a reductive association between a given mathematical concept
and single physical property, it is true that we can encounter some interpretive
uncertainty with our best mathematical scientific representations. This uncertainty
is ignored by those who are overly confident of the scope of their representations,
and this can lead to the sorts of failures discussed in chapter 7. For example, Laplace
did not understand why he was able to improve on Newton’s estimate of the speed
of sound and wrongly took his success to support the existence of caloric. These
risks of failure go hand in hand with the positive contributions mathematics makes
to science. But this situation is not mysterious. It is an instance of the more general
fact that we do not know everything and that complete certainty is achieved only by
refusing to believe anything.

8.3

DESCRIPTION AND DISCOVERY

In addition to the particular descriptive problem that asks how a given mathematical
concept describes a target system, Steiner also considers the general descriptive
problem of how mathematical concepts quite generally succeed in describing features of the physical world. This problem is closest to the one I have pursued in this
book. But as with the particular case, Steiner makes the unwarranted assumption
that the presence of mathematical concepts must be tied to their descriptive role in
picking out physical concepts. This overlooks the wide range of potential contributions that mathematics has for this or that scientific representation. In his discussion
of the general case, though, Steiner also makes the unfortunate decision to follow
Wigner’s aesthetic characterization of mathematics. This further distorts Steiner’s
pursuit of the general descriptive problem and paves the way for his interest in the
distinct discovery problem and its philosophical significance.
Steiner introduces the general descriptive problem by saying that it is
the most profound. It concerns the applicability of mathematics as such, not
of this or that concept. It is therefore an epistemological question, about the
relation between Mind and Cosmos. It is the question raised by Eugene Wigner
about the “unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences.”
(Steiner 1998, p. 45)

