https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14

The Philosophy of Mathematics

have a violation of our second principle that distinguishes evidence for the
target and an explanation of the target. Sometimes our evidence allows us to
predict how something will be in advance, but these predictions are not explanations of that outcome. Consider, for example, the predictive model for protein
folding known as AlphaFold (Senior et al. 2020). A protein is a molecule made
up of a sequence of amino acids. Many of the functional features of the protein
are tied to the three-dimensional shape it assumes. The DeepMind research
group developed AlphaFold as a neural network that can efﬁciently solve this
daunting computational problem in a reliable and accurate way. The neural
network contains a large number of elements whose connections transform the
input information about some given sequence of amino acids into
a representation of the three-dimensional structure of the protein. The
researchers trained and reﬁned the network using some of the available data
about protein structures and various algorithms that adjust the connections
between elements. Crucially, though, the elements (besides the input and output
layers) and connections are not assigned any determinate physical interpretation. This means that we have a mathematical structure that is almost completely detached from any structural mappings to protein features.
Unsurprisingly, in their summary of this very successful research, the scientists
do not employ the language of explanation, saying instead that “[h]ere we show
that we can train a neural network to make accurate predictions of the distances
between pairs of residues [of amino acids], which convey more information
about the structure than contact predictions” (Senior et al. 2020, p. 706). The
information about the protein structure is effectively encoded in the mathematical structure of the network by elements with no clear physical interpretation.
So Baron’s test is met, but this mathematical derivation does not explain why
that protein has that structure. Baron might respond that a derivation of protein
structure using AlphaFold is not an explanation because the derivation lacks
some other necessary features of an explanation. I would agree with Baron on
this point. But this shows that we cannot identify what makes something
a genuine mathematical explanation by focusing on how mathematics affords
derivations.15

2.2 Causation
Already we can see that some approaches to explanation face severe difﬁculties.
I will say that an approach is a monist approach if it supposes that every
explanation involves the very same explanatory relation. I think of these relations as relations between facts in the world: if A obtains because of B, then
15

See Povich (2021, pp. 516–519) for a similar worry, along with concerns of a different kind.

