11

Page 10 of 12

B. McLoone

causally efficacious (2016b, pp. 477–478). Otsuka does not wish to show that natural selection can be causally efficacious despite that natural selection is a population-level property. Rather, Otsuka hopes to sidestep the debate by attempting to
show that “the causes of evolutionary changes,” of which he takes natural selection
to be an example, “all belong to the level of individuals, in the sense that these variables, including environmental factors, denote properties of individuals” (2016b, p.
477, emphasis in original).
As we saw, however, because Otsuka attempts to formulate an argument for causalism using exclusively individual-level properties, Otsuka is forced to adopt an
account of natural selection in which reference to trait or fitness variation is necessarily absent, since trait and fitness variation are population-level properties. The
result of this strategy is that we no longer seem to be talking about the causal power
of natural selection, at least as the phenomenon is generally understood. We are
instead simply recognizing that individual-level properties, such as an individual’s
phenotype, can have a causal influence on an individual’s fitness. If fitness is treated
as a realized value, as Otsuka insists it should be (2016b), then that claim is not
remotely controversial. In any case, the claim is only obliquely related to the dispute
over causalism.
This raises another important point, with which I will close. Otsuka derives
standard equations from evolutionary biology through an application of the trek rule
to an underlying causal model (2016a, pp. 258–259). Briefly, the trek rule allows
one to calculate the covariance of two variables, X and Y, in a causal model by looking at the variance of other variables in the causal model and the values of the path
coefficients between variables (see Ibid., pp. 252–253 for lucid exegesis). The trek
rule has nothing to say about a causal model when the variables in the model, X and
Y included, do not vary. Thus, for Otsuka to go from his causal models to an equation that has (co)variance terms, such as the Price equation, Otsuka employs the following procedure: If we assume the variables in the causal model have nonzero variance, then the trek rules tells us how the variables would covary, and from this we
can derive standard equations from evolutionary biology, such as the Price equation.
But here is the rub: In this context, variance is a property of a population of individuals. While a trait Z and its fitness W denote properties of an individual, the variance of Z or W is a property of a population of individuals—e.g., the variance of Z
describes the extent to which the values of Z in a population deviate from the mean
of these values; the same is true, mutatis mutandis, for the variance of W. Thus,
while it is true that Otsuka’s underlying causal models relate exclusively individuallevel properties, it is not true that he uses only individual-level properties to derive
standard equations from evolutionary biology.

Conclusion
Otsuka has put forward a different sort of argument for the claim that natural selection can cause evolution, an argument that, Otsuka claims, avoids a commitment
to the view that population-level properties can be causally efficacious. But it is
precisely because Otsuka eschews reference to population-level properties that the

13

