11

Page 8 of 12

B. McLoone

statisticalists then claim that natural selection cannot cause evolution since the two
relata are instead in a non-causal dependency relationship. Commenting on this
argumentative move, Otsuka writes (2016b, p. 475),
…concluding the causal inertness of selection on this ground is just moving
the goalposts. In fact, their ‘definition’ of natural selection is a far cry from
its common usage and contradicted by the very opening sentence of Fisher
(1930): ‘Natural selection is not evolution’.
Otsuka takes lack of fit with the relevant literature to legitimately ground a rejection of a description of natural selection, particularly within the context of a debate
about whether natural selection can cause evolution. This is the same methodology
I employ.
Third, Otsuka provides no compelling reason as to why we should adopt his
description of natural selection. It is certainly justifiable to modify the intension of
a theoretical term, or its presumed extension, if one can adduce a good reason such
modification is called for. In fact our accounts of natural selection have changed
since Darwin (Gayon 1998). For instance, Darwin often (e.g., 1859, pp. 126–127,
489–490) though not always (e.g., Ibid., pp. 62–63) took natural selection to involve
competition for limited resources. But there is a case to be made that the underlying logic of the theory does not require this (Lewontin 1970), and contemporary
accounts of natural selection therefore typically leave out reference to resource competition (see Godfrey-Smith 2007, 2009, chapter 2). As another example, Darwin
at times appears to combine what many would now distinguish as natural selection
and evolution by natural selection (1859, p. 61, pp. 126–127). That natural selection
can occur without evolution is plausible given the relative ease with which one can
imagine apparent cases of natural selection (variation in fitness or even heritable
variation in fitness) in the absence of evolution (Sober 1984a, pp. 40–41; GodfreySmith 2009, chapter 2). (It is for this reason, incidentally, that Matthen and Ariew’s
(2009) account of natural selection, in which natural selection is claimed to entail
evolution, strikes both me and Otsuka as indefensible.)
In contrast, Otsuka provides little or no reason as to why his novel account of
natural selection should be adopted. The closest Otsuka comes to offering a defense
of his account occurs when he claims causal models are the most rigorous framework to understand why and how a population will evolve and that “the meaning and
nature of the concepts like fitness, selection, and drift are determined unequivocally
within these causal models” (2016b, p. 480). But one can consistently maintain that
causal models should be used to predict and explain evolution and also maintain
that trait or fitness variation is a necessary condition for natural selection—see, for
instance, Glymour (2006). This is because the meaning of a concept like natural
selection is not determined unequivocally by the causal models Otsuka references.
The models Otsuka references relate certain trait, environmental, and fitness variables via edges and causal parameters. It is a decision to interpret one or a few of the
variables, edges, and parameters in the model as a representation of natural selection; the model itself says precisely nothing about the matter. Even if we grant that
one must first have an underlying causal model to develop a legitimate account of
natural selection, it does not follow from this that natural selection must be identified

13

