Euro Jnl Phil Sci (2013) 3:115–132

119

Fig. 1 A figure from Volterra’s and D’Ancona’s Les associations biologiques au point de vue
mathematique (1935, p. 28). The graph shows the oscillating population sizes of a predator-preysystem. This is one possible solution for the coupled, non-linear differential Eqs. 1 and 2 if
appropriate values are assigned to the coefficients (see p. 4)

3 A motivation for modeling: Volterra and D’Ancona on method
In the first chapter of their joint Les associations biologiques au point de
vue mathématique (1935), Volterra and D’Ancona discuss which methods are
suitable for quantitative studies in ecology. They consider several methods one
by one, explaining why they are desirable, but not suitable for their purposes;
then they give reasons for preferring their own (modeling) approach. We will
now review this discussion in some detail.
The first case on which the authors focus is that of the physiologist, who
performs experiments on individual animals under laboratory conditions. The
advantage of this approach, which the authors call “the experimental method”
(p. 6), is that it allows the scientist to perform controlled experiments: The
role of putative causes can be established by varying them while keeping
alternative causes under control. In the authors’ words, one must isolate
biological phenomena “from external causes which tend to act on their course
and to disturb the results”.5 Thus, the laboratory physiologist’s approach may
be characterized as causal inference by controlled experiments. However,
Volterra and D’Ancona deem this approach unsuitable for studies in ecology,
since ecologists, unlike physiologists, study interactions of entire populations
and not of individual organisms.6
Second, one may transfer the method of causal inference to ecology by performing controlled breeding experiments on whole populations. Volterra and
D’Ancona find breeding experiments problematic as well, however, mainly for
two reasons:
1. Spatial and temporal extendedness: The experiment would have to be
carried out in a space that is very large relative to the size of animals, and
over a long time period relative to breeding cycles.

5 “Mais dans le domaine de l’oecologie ces méthodes [the experimental methods] n’ont été jusqu’à

présent que fort peu appliquées et cela s’explique, si l’on songe que les phénomènes biologiques ne
sauraient devenir l’objet d’une étude quantitative qu’après avoir été isolés des causes extrinsèques
susceptibles d’agir sur leur cours et d’en troubler les résultats” (Volterra and D’Ancona 1935, p. 6).
6 We are not denying the possibility of experimental ecology, which today is a rich discipline. We
do, however, believe that Volterra and D’Ancona are pointing out real difficulties.

