12

Introduction: pragmatics

Explicature (Sperber and Wilson 1995: 182)
A proposition communicated by an utterance is an explicature if and only if it is a
development of a logical form encoded by the utterance.

The process of developing a logical form into a fully propositional form may
involve not only reference assignment but other types of pragmatic enrichment
illustrated in (4)-(6). The implicatures of an utterance are all the other propositions that make up the speaker’s meaning:
Implicature (Sperber and Wilson 1995: 182)
A proposition communicated by an utterance, but not explicitly, is an implicature.

Thus, Lisa’s meaning in (6b) might include the explicature that she has eaten
supper on the evening of utterance’ and the implicature that she doesn’t want to
eat with the Joneses because she’s already had supper that evening.
Explicatures are recovered by a combination of decoding and inference.
Different utterances may convey the same explicature in different ways, with
different proportions of decoding and inference involved. Compare Lisa’s
answer in (6b) (repeated below) with the three alternative versions in (6c)-(6e):
(6)

ALAN JONES: Do you want to join us for supper?
LIisA: No, thanks. I’ve eaten.

tisA: No, thanks. I’ve already eaten supper.
Lisa: No, thanks. I’ve already eaten tonight.
Lisa: No, thanks. I’ve already eaten supper tonight.
ep
aoge

All four answers communicate not only the same overall meaning but also the
same explicature and implicatures. If this is not immediately obvious, there is
a standard test for deciding whether some part of the speaker’s meaning is part
of the explicit truth-conditional content of the utterance or merely an implicature. The test involves checking whether the item falls within the scope of
logical operators when embedded into a negative or conditional sentence:
explicit truth-conditional content falls within the scope of negation and other
logical operators, while implicatures do not (Carston 2002a: chapter 2.6.3).
Thus, consider the hypothesis that the explicature of (6b) is simply the trivial
truth that Lisa has eaten something at some point before the time of utterance,
and that she is merely implicating that she has eaten that evening. The standard
embedding test suggests that this hypothesis is false. If Lisa had replied
‘I haven’t eaten’, she would clearly not have been asserting that she has never
eaten in her life, but merely denying that she has eaten supper that very evening.
So in replying ‘I’ve eaten’, Lisa is explicitly communicating that she has eaten
supper that very evening.
Although all four answers in (6b)—(6e) convey the same explicature, there is
a clear sense in which Lisa’s meaning is least explicit in (6b) and most explicit
in (6e), with (6c) and (6d) falling in between. These differences in degree of

