A deflationary account of metaphors

105

magic tricks to amuse an audience. In the context of a discussion about a show
for a child’s birthday party, the second sense is likely to be activated first, and
the information (or reminder) that their friend Archie is a magician in this sense
is likely to satisfy Peter’s expectations of relevance by implying that he might
perform at Billy’s birthday party. In presuming that her utterance would be
relevant to Peter, Mary must have expected him to derive this implication,
which can therefore be seen as an implicit part of her meaning, i.e. an implicature. The disambiguation of ‘magician’ as someone who does magic tricks
dovetails with this implicature, and the two confirm one another by jointly
yielding an interpretation that is relevant in the expected way.
The linguistic meaning of the sentence ‘Let’s ask him’ is very schematic and
gappy, leaving the second part of Mary’s utterance wide open to an indefinite
range of interpretations. ‘Him’ may refer to Archie, to Billy, or to someone
else. ‘Ask’ may be understood as asking for advice, help, an opinion, a favour,
and so on. Thus, the whole sentence might be used to mean Let’s ask Billy
whether he would like to have Archie perform magic tricks at his birthday
party. This interpretation would make sense in the situation, and would be
quite compatible with Grice’s maxims of conversation, or with standard
theories of discourse coherence. Still, in a context where the first part of the
utterance (‘Archie is a magician’) implicates that Archie could perform magic
tricks at Billy’s party, the first interpretation found by following a path of least
effort will be that Peter and Mary should ask Archie to perform. Since this
would satisfy Peter’s expectations of relevance, he should accept it as the
intended interpretation, without looking any further for alternative interpretations that might also be relevant. (None of these other potential interpretations
could be optimally relevant, because extra processing effort would be required
to retrieve them. They are therefore not worth considering unless there is some
reason to think that Mary has failed to express herself in an optimally relevant
way.)
In this example, Mary is speaking literally (which shows how far even the
interpretation of an utterance that is literally understood can go beyond its
linguistic meaning and is not just a simple matter of decoding). Our claim is
that the very same procedure that yields a literal interpretation in this case would
yield a non-literal interpretation in others.

5.4

Meaning construction

The decoded senses of a word or other linguistic expression in an utterance provide
a point of departure for an inferential process of meaning construction. The
meaning constructed may be narrower than the decoded meaning, as in (8) or (9):
(8)

I have a temperature.

