ON

SENSE

AND

REFERENCE

OF

glass in the interior of the telescope, and by the retinal image of the
observer. The former I compare to the sense, the latter is like the idea or
experience. The optical image in the telescope is indeed one-sided and
dependent upon the standpoint of observation; but it is still objective,
inasmuch as it can be used by several observers. At any rate it could be
arranged for several to use it simultaneously. But each one would have
his own retinal image. On account of the diverse shapes of the observers’
eyes, even a geometrical congruence could hardly be achieved, and an
actual coincidence would be out of the question. This analogy might be
developed still further, by assuming A’s retinal image made visible to B;
or A might also see his own retinal image in a mirror. In this way we
might perhaps show how an idea can itself be taken as an object, but as
such is not for the observer what it directly is for the person having the
idea. But to pursue this would take us too far afield.
We can now recognize three levels of difference between words,
expressions, or whole sentences. The difference may concern at most the
ideas, or the sense but not the reference, or, finally, the reference as
well. With respect to the first level, it is to be noted that, on account of
the uncertain connexion of ideas with words, a difference may hold for
one person, which another does not find. The difference between a
translation and the original text should properly not overstep the first
level. To the possible differences here belong also the colouring and
shading which poetic eloquence seeks to give to the sense. Such
colouring and shading are not objective, and must be evoked by each
hearer or reader according to the hints of the poet or the speaker.
Without some affinity in human ideas art would certainly be impossible;
but it can never be exactly determined how far the intentions of the poet
are realized.
In what follows there will be no further discussion of ideas and
experiences; they have been mentioned here only to ensure that the idea
aroused in the hearer by a word shall not be confused with its sense or its
reference.
To make short and exact expressions possible, let the following
phraseology be established:
A proper name (word, sign, sign combination, expression) expresses
its sense, stands for or designates its reference. By means of a sign we
express its sense and designate its reference.
Idealists or sceptics will perhaps long since have objected: ‘You talk,
without further ado. of the Moon as an object; but how do you know
that the name ‘the Moon’ has any reference? How do you know that
anything whatsoever has a reference?’ I reply that when we say ‘the

