76

P.

F.

STRAWSON

for the mythical logically proper name), that accounts for the misleading
attempt to elucidate the nature of the variable by reference to such
words as ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’.
Of ordinary proper names it is sometimes said that they are essentially
words each of which is used to refer to just one individual. This is
obviously false. Many ordinary personal names—names par excellence—
are correctly used to refer to numbers of people. An ordinary personal
name, is, roughly, a word, used referringly, of which the use is not
dictated by any descriptive meaning the word may have, and is not
prescribed by any such general rule for use as a referring expression (or
a part of a referring expression) as we find in the case of such words
as ‘I’, ‘this’ and ‘the’, but is governed by ad hoc conventions for each
particular set of applications of the word to a given person. The important point is that the correctness of such applications does not follow
from any general rule or convention for the use of the word as such.
(The limit of absurdity and obvious circularity is reached in the attempt
to treat names as disguised description in Russell’s sense; for what is in
the special sense implied, but not entailed, by my now referring to
someone by name is simply the existence of someone, now being referred
to, who is conventionally referred to by that name.) Even this feature of
names, however, is only a symptom of the purpose for which they are
employed. At present our choice of names is partly arbitrary, partly
dependent on legal and social observances. It would be perfectly possible
to have a thorough-going system of names, based e.g. on dates of birth,
or on a minute classification of physiological and anatomical differences.
But the success of any such system would depend entirely on the convenience of the resulting name-allotments for the purpose of making
unique references; and this would depend on the multiplicity of the
classifications used and the degree to which they cut haphazard across
normal social groupings. Given a sufficient degree of both, the selectivity
supplied by context would do the rest; just as is the case with our present
naming habits. Had we such a system, we could use name-words descriptively (as we do at present, to a limited extent and in a different way,
with some famous names) as well as referringly. But it is by criteria
derived from consideration of the requirements of the referring task that
we should assess the adequacy of any system of naming. From the
naming point of view, no kind of classification would be better or worse
than any other simply because of the kind of classification—natal or
anatomical—that it was.
I have already mentioned the class of quasi-names, of substantival
phrases which grow capital letters, and of which such phrases as ‘the

