Abrams

propensity is controversial (Eagle, 2004), but is taken seriously by
many philosophers of science and some scientists. The PIF’s claim
is that there are propensities for a particular individual to produce
certain numbers of offspring, or to produce other evolutionarily
relevant outcomes. The PIF claims that these propensities help
define a concept of fitness (Beatty and Finsen, 1989; Brandon,
1990; Ramsey, 2006). By definition, propensities are causal in
nature, so the PIF would make tendential token fitness a causal
notion.
There have been attempts to define tendential token fitnesses
in other ways, such as Bouchard and Rosenberg’s (2004) definition of fitness in terms of the degree to which design problems
are solved by a particular organism’s traits. These other conceptions of tendential token fitness are vague in many respects, but
they might also make fitness into a causal notion. It might seem,
then, that by understanding natural selection as depending fundamentally on differences in tendential token fitnesses, its supposed
causal character could be elucidated. It appears that this is not a
role that tendential token fitness can play, however.
Sober (1984) argued that fitness, viewed as a function of all
traits of a particular individual, can have no causal role in the
individual’s reproductive success. The reason is that, often, only
some of an individual’s phenotypic properties end up actually
playing a role in its survival and reproduction. In general, traits
need not be selected for because they play a role in every individual’s life. Rather, a trait will be selected for when it confers
a benefit often enough that the trait’s average benefit exceeds its
average cost, to a greater degree than competing traits. However,
this situation is consistent with the trait making no difference,
positive or negative, in the lives of particular individuals. Thus,
for example, a heritable trait which influences the production
of pheromones might play no role in the mating of a particular
individual if the individual dies early because another heritable trait reduces parasite resistance. The outcome would have
been the same if the individual had had a trait with a different
effect on pheromones. Sober would say that in such cases the
parasite-resistance trait was a cause of the individual’s LRS, but
the pheromone-influence trait was not. Thus what Sober calls
“overall fitness,” which would reflect all of the organism’s traits
(or at least heritable ones), does not itself play a causal role in
the organism’s reproductive success. Byerly and Michod (1991)
made a point closely related to Sober’s, arguing against a concept
of overall fitness (“adaptedness”) because “there is no underlying
property which serves as a common physical basis for dispositions of organisms” (p. 6) to have particular tendencies toward
reproductive success in different environments.
Abrams (2007) made a different but somewhat related point.
He argued that the minor differences in environmental circumstances which affect measured properties such as lifetime reproductive success (section 4.2) can also have a strong influence on
tendential token fitness. Abrams argued that most physiological
processes and ecological interactions involve such a low degree of
stochasticity, once details of surrounding circumstances are fixed,
that each such interaction is effectively deterministic. According
to this view, the variation in reproductive success that can be
seen, for example, even for plant clones in superficially identical experimental treatments (e.g., Antonovics et al., 1987) is the

www.frontiersin.org

Measured, modeled, and causal conceptions of fitness

result of minute, unobserved variation in distribution of substances in soil, differences in water flow, etc. All of these factors
could be identified in principle, even though they may be difficult
to identify in practice. Abrams argued, in effect, that variations
between outcomes in such experiments would not be the result
of a fundamental stochasticity. (By “fundamental stochasticity” I
refer to variation that is not subject to further explanation, even
in principle. For example, according to many physicists, variation
in outcomes due to quantum mechanical effects has no further
explanation.) However, if an individual’s LRS, for example, is the
nearly deterministic result of the specific circumstances in which
it happens to find itself, then tendential token fitnesses will correspond nearly exactly to measurable token fitnesses: the only thing
that can happen, given the circumstances, is what does happen, to
a high degree of approximation. To the extent that this is so, the
argument in section 4.2 that differences in measurable token fitness cannot play a central role in the concept of natural selection
would apply to tendential token fitness as well. Ariew and Ernst
(2009) give additional arguments against tendential token fitness.
4.4. STATISTICAL TYPE FITNESS

Many of the most useful fitness concepts are defined in terms of
statistics on sets of measurable token fitnesses—i.e., on measurements of individual organisms in actual populations (e.g., Spitze,
1993; Cooper et al., 2003; Shaw et al., 2008; Byars et al., 2010).
These are what I have been calling statistical type fitnesses, and
are illustrated by numerous concepts defined by Stearns (1976,
1992) and de Jong (1994). Can fitness differences in this sense be
considered causes of evolution? De Jong’s remark (1994, p. 4),
mentioned above, that certain fitness concepts “summarizing
numerical processes” don’t allow fitness to cause evolution may
refer to statistical type fitness rather than to purely mathematical
fitness.
Philosophers of biology who have come to be known informally as “statisticalists” argue that numerical concepts of fitness
are not causal (e.g., Matthen, 2009; Matthen and Ariew, 2009;
Walsh, 2007, 2010). I won’t review these arguments—which go
further than Endler’s (1986) argument that natural selection
is not a “force”—nor the large number of responses to them
(e.g., Reisman and Forber, 2005; Haug, 2007; Shapiro and Sober,
2007; Millstein et al., 2009; Northcott, 2009; Otsuka et al., 2011;
Abrams, 2012a). I note, however, that although statisticalists do
not make all of the distinctions made here, some of their arguments do seem to focus on what I am calling statistical type, or
possibly purely mathematical fitness concepts.
In my view, there are two fundamental reasons that natural
selection, considered as a cause of evolution, cannot be understood as depending on statistical type fitnesses. First, statistical
fitnesses are merely means for describing the way that a population is in fact changing over time. As such, they cannot also be
taken as causing those very same changes.
Second, one can extend a point made above about measurable
token fitness in section 4.3 to statistical type fitness. I pointed
out that measurable token fitnesses of parents and offspring
can sometimes be very different due to the details of interactions with environmental circumstances. Statistical type fitnesses
are mathematical functions of measurable token fitnesses. As a

October 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 196 | 7

