Abrams

the types of particular individuals, this is a statistical type fitness [see e.g., de Jong (1994) for comparisons of several such
concepts]. Often researchers treat one or more statistical type fitness concepts as the only type fitness concepts characteristic of
a population (e.g., Stearns, 1976). Note that the term “statistic”
is sometimes restricted to functions applied to sample data from
a larger population; I use the term “statistical type fitness” even
when measurements on all members of a population are used to
calculate a fitness measure.
It’s worth mentioning cases in which what is under study is,
in part, the response of a lineage to new mutations. For example, Lenski et al. (1991) compared growth rates of Escherichia
coli lineages which differed only at a marker allele with no significant effect on fitness. The authors argued that differences in
substitutions of new mutations arising in different lineages were
responsible for differences in measured growth rates. One can
view this experiment as aggregating fitnesses of different genotypes resulting from a number of mutations, but one purpose
of the experiment was to record fitnesses for distinct lineages
arising from the same initial type. What is being measured in
this case, then, are statistical type fitnesses of the whole genome,
including its capability for changes in epistatic interactions as new
mutations arise.
2.4. PARAMETRIC TYPE FITNESS

Sometimes researchers view a statistical type fitness as a way
of estimating some underlying fitness value characteristic of a
type. For example, Byars et al. (2010), mentioned above, use LRS
measurements to estimate an underlying selection gradient with
respect to variation in traits such as height and cholesterol level.
The regression coefficient in terms of which such a selection gradient is described is a statistical type fitness, since it is defined by
statistics on a set of measurable token fitnesses. However, Byars
et al. treat this coefficient as an estimator of something else: this is
an underlying selection gradient that varies with height, cholesterol level, etc., but which is not measured directly. To treat a
fitness as an estimator of some kind is, implicitly at least, to have
in mind an additional kind of fitness which plays a role like that
of a statistical parameter of the situation. Fitness in the latter
sense would capture an underlying fact about the population in its
overall environment, defined partly in terms of probabilities (see
below). In such cases, what is estimated is what I call a parametric
type fitness. Note that the estimator is a statistical type fitness; the
parametric type fitness is what is estimated. Typically, parametric
type fitnesses are known only approximately via their estimators.
The degree of certainty of our knowledge of them is given by
the probabilities determined by the method of estimation and the
data on which the estimate is based.
Remarks by Elena and Lenski (2003) also suggest the idea of a
parametric type fitness. These authors discuss experiments such
as (Lenski et al., 1991), mentioned above, in which the fitnesses
of distinct populations of asexual microorganisms are compared.
Elena and Lenski explicitly describe these fitnesses as properties
of types (p. 458), and since these fitnesses are determined by measuring the growth rate of an entire population, they are statistical
type fitnesses. However, Elena and Lenski remark that such a fitness measure “reflects the propensity to leave descendants” (Elena

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Measured, modeled, and causal conceptions of fitness

and Lenski, 2003, p. 458). The use of the word “propensity” suggests that the measured fitnesses are being viewed as estimating
an underlying tendency of a type. (I don’t assume that Elena and
Lenski intend “propensity” in the sense described below.)
Researchers may not always make it clear whether a statistically
defined fitness is being treated as a value which is itself of interest, or is being treated instead as an estimator of a value which
is not directly observable. However, the distinction is sometimes
explicit, as in (Byars et al., 2010), noted above, and is sometimes reflected mathematically. A particularly clear illustration
of a mathematical distinction between measured and estimated
quantities is provided by Weir and Cockerham’s (1984) widelyused (Weir and Hill, 2002) methods for estimating F-statistics
such as FST , which can be used to provide evidence of natural
selection under some circumstances. [For example, a common
class of methods use FST values to show that the genetic differentiation between two populations at a particular locus is
unusual relative to other loci. This provides evidence of selection
if the extreme FST value can be shown to be improbable without past selection (e.g., Holsinger and Weir, 2009).] In Weir and
Cockerham’s approach, the way in which F-statistic values are calculated differs depending on whether they are intended to characterize a difference between the measurements of two or more
populations, or instead are intended to characterize an underlying difference that is estimated by those measurements but not
directly observed (Weir, 1996, ch. 5; Holsinger and Weir, 2009;
cf. Nei and Kumar, 2000, section 12.3). This example is discussed
further below.
2.5. PURELY MATHEMATICAL FITNESS

All of the preceding concepts should be distinguished from what
I’ll call purely mathematical fitness concepts. Many fitness concepts are used in mathematical models and computer simulations in ways which are neutral with respect to the distinctions
described above. When developing or investigating implications
of a mathematical or computer model, it’s often unnecessary to
specify whether fitnesses appearing in the model must be defined
in terms of statistics on collections of individuals within populations, or should instead refer to some underlying parameter.
Models are often implicitly used as if they abstract from such distinctions, treating fitness as a primarily mathematical concept.
For example, a model may define the relative fitness wAA of a
genotype AA as any number between 0 and 1, inclusive, which
then may be multiplied, in certain formulas, by the number of AA
individuals (e.g., Nagylaki, 1992; Ewens, 2004; Rice, 2004). Some
empirical applications of such a model will specify values for
wAA by calculating statistics derived from measurable token fitness values, but the mathematical model as such does not require
that method of determining values for wAA . The same model
might also be interpreted, in some cases, as describing parametric
fitnesses. It needn’t even be clear whether fitnesses are properties of types or tokens. For example, consider fitnesses in the
Robertson-Price identity (Lynch and Walsh, 1998, p. 46), a simple version of the Price equation (Price, 1970) (cf. de Jong, 1994;
Rice, 2004):
z = cov(w, z) = E (wi − w)(zi − z).

October 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 196 | 4

