Synthese

(2026) 207:167

Page 19 of 24

167

for these notions did not involve metaphorical thinking, there is a great danger that
users (and experts) treat them as metaphorical in a more substantial way. For us, the
possible disadvantages of this kind of lexical shorthand are sufficient reason to steer
clear of them.
A critic of our position might concede that we succeed in defending our account
against the mere language use objection and the lexical shorthand objection to a
sufficient degree. Yet, they might object to our strategy to capture the source domain
(the human mind) in philosophical and scientific terms. Instead, they might argue, we
should be operating with a simpler, folk-psychological understanding of it. According to this potential objection, we impose too strict constraints on the clarity and
unambiguity of the source domain when the metaphors are actually based on folkpsychological concepts. Call this the folk-psychological concepts objection. Our
reply to this objection is twofold.
First, the metaphors at issue, which capture factual chatbot mistakes as hallucinations or bullshit, are frequently used in philosophical and scientific discourses on
ChatGPT and other chatbots. The question then is why research in philosophy, AI,
and cognate disciplines should be informed or even guided by metaphors that pick
out a folk-psychologically conceived source domain. Prima facie, philosophical and
scientific concepts are more specific, precise, and well-developed than their folkpsychological counterparts. It stands to reason that research in relevant disciplines
should aim for conceptual clarity and avoid conceptual ambiguity. Consequently,
operating with folk-psychological concepts is difficult to motivate in scholarly contexts when more precise, theoretically formed and scientifically corroborated concepts are available.
Second, even where the metaphors at issue are used outside philosophical-scientific discourses and are disseminated through newspaper articles, popular science
pieces, or progress reports of big tech companies, the folk-psychological concepts
objection does not succeed. As research in experimental philosophy and philosophy
of language shows, human agents have different understandings of key folk-psychological concepts such as ‘vision’ (Fischer et al., 2023), ‘pain’ (Coninx et al., 2024;
Liu, 2023), or ‘lying’ (Wiegmann & Meibauer, 2019). This makes it unlikely that the
folk has a shared and ubiquitous understanding of other folk-psychological concepts
such as ‘hallucination’ and ‘bullshitting.’ This lack of a folk-psychological consensus
about the relevant source domains is exacerbated by empirical evidence suggesting
that folk-psychological concepts differ substantially across cultures (Henrich et al.,
2010). Accordingly, the hallucination and bullshitting metaphors fail also when their
source domains are situated in the context of folk-psychology. The conceptual variability problem still applies, as folk-psychological concepts tend to be as polysemous
as their philosophical-scientific counterparts.

7 Concluding remarks
In this paper, we have argued against the use of ‘hallucination’ and ‘bullshitting’
as terms to describe chatbot mistakes. Using conceptual metaphor theory as a lens,
we have critically analysed these terms and argued that each metaphor involves at

13

