167

Page 8 of 24

Synthese

(2026) 207:167

the target domain. The metaphor is successful if, by grasping the items and processes
in the source domain, we can better grasp the mapped items and processes in the target
domain. Lakoff and Johnson (2003) and Fernandez-Duque and Johnson (1999) use
the mind-as-machine metaphor as an example. Here, machine is the source domain
and our grasp of machines (e.g., functions, products, automated functioning) can help
us understand the mind (in this case, mental capacities, ideas, and thinking, respectively). If the source domain of machines is sufficiently similar to the target domain,
and if the conceptual mapping between the two is apt, then the mind-as-machine
metaphor makes sense and helps us better understand the target phenomenon. The
mapping then “gives rise to a systematic use of ordinary, conventional linguistic
expressions in much of our talk about mental operations” (Fernandez-Duque & Johnson, 1999, p. 85). Hence, the metaphor enables the use of expressions like “I’m a
little rusty today” and “we’re running out of steam” to be informative about mental
phenomena (Lakoff & Johnson, 2003, p. 27).
The key idea behind conceptual metaphor theory was that metaphors are not
merely a linguistic phenomenon, but a crucial part of human cognition. Thus, conceptual metaphor theory has been applied to phenomena like gestures (Lakoff &
Johnson, 2003), attention (Fernandez-Duque & Johnson, 1999), and mathematical
cognition (Lakoff & Núñez, 2000; Pantsar, 2015). Although some remain sceptical
about the application of conceptual metaphor theory to describe and explain cognitive processes (e.g., McGlone, 2011), those who support its application typically see
it as more than just useful heuristics. On their view, conceptual metaphors are seen
as being essential for fields like cognitive psychology. As a representative example,
consider the way in which Fernandez-Duque and Johnson describe metaphors for
attention as “defin[ing] entire research programs, circumscribing which attentional
phenomena are studied, how they are studied, and what counts as evidence” (Fernandez-Duque & Johnson, 1999, p. 83). Importantly, the authors identify the rationale
of attention metaphors as the cause of problems for candidate theories of attention
(Ibid.).
In what follows, we argue that – independently of its possible weaknesses – conceptual metaphor theory can help us make sense of the metaphors that are frequently
used to describe chatbot mistakes. To be more precise, we argue that it can help us
understand why key metaphors used in the literature fail to be informative. Just like
the metaphors for attention can cause theories of attention to run into problems, as
shown by Fernandez-Duque and Johnson (1999), metaphors for chatbot mistakes, we
argue, can cause misunderstandings of chatbot behaviours.
But before we can move on to that argumentation, we need to elaborate conceptual
metaphor theory by identifying three ways in which metaphors can fail, i.e., in which
their use does not improve our understanding of the target phenomenon.10 The first,
and perhaps most obvious, way of failing is when the target domain does not bear
sufficient similarity to the source domain. “Snakes are just big worms” is a failed
metaphor in this sense. The source domain (worms) is not similar enough to the target

10

Curiously, even though a lot has been written about conceptual metaphor theory, we are not aware of an
explicit treatment of the different ways in which metaphors can fail.

13

