The critical elucidation of purposiveness 293
The hexagon case thereby presents the logic of the teleological judgment generaliter. I paraphrased it in a way so as to make another instance of teleology
(bee hexagons) immediately intelligible, but real purposiveness proceeds precisely in the same way: the production of something which is made up of multiple parts whose reunion is contingent vis-à-vis the laws of nature, but which
displays a remarkable outcome that relies on such a multiplicity, calls for a concept that accounts for the “common ground” of these parts, and provides a reason
for their reunion:
But now we find among the products of nature special and very widely distributed genera, which contain within themselves a combination of efficient
causes that we must ground in the concept of a purpose, even if we wish to
employ only experience, i.e., observation in accordance with a principle suitable to their inner possibility. If we wished to judge their form and its possibility merely in accordance with mechanical laws, in which the idea of the
effect must not be taken as the ground of the possibility of their cause, but vice
versa, then it would be impossible to obtain even one experiential concept of
the specific form of these natural things which would put us in the position
to move from their inner disposition as cause to the effect, since the parts of
these machines, not insofar as each has a separate ground of its possibility but
rather only insofar as all together have a common ground, are the cause of the
effect that is visible in them.
(FI, Ak. XX, p.235, my emphasis)
Only the presupposition of such a reason, as a common ground for the reunion of parts, allows us to explain the functioning of the system at stake. Kant
gives the example of the vertebrate eye, exposed in the “First Introduction” and
already considered in The Only Possible Argument (Chapter 3). Kant here takes
his turn in the long tradition of admiration for the highly teleological performance of the animal eye:
E.g., by saying that the crystalline lens in the eye has the purpose of reuniting, by
means of a second refraction of the light rays, the rays emanating from one point
at one point on the retina, one says only that the representation of an end in the
causality of nature is conceived in the production of the eye because such an idea
serves as a principle for guiding the investigation of the eye as far as the part that
has been mentioned is concerned, with regard to the means that one can think up
to promote such effect. No cause acting in accordance with the representation of
purposes, i.e., no intentionally acting cause, is thereby attributed to nature, which
would be a determining teleological judgment and, as such, transcendent, since it
would suggest a causality that lies beyond the bounds of nature.
(FI, Ak. XX, p.236). (B)

