434

MATTHEW C. HAUG

or folk-theoretic) and what one takes ‘filling’ that role to consist in. Below,
I discuss two such ways; one involves causal relations, while the other is
purely formal.
After discussing how the grounding question is related to the exclusion
problem in Section 2, I sketch a causal account of realization in Section
3. I argue that a causal account of realization can be used to provide an
adequate answer to the grounding question. If the population-level properties involved in the process of selection are realized in this way, then
they are grounded in individual-level causal properties so that the exclusion problem does not arise. In Section 4, I consider in detail the case of
adaptive melanism in rock pocket mice and show how the causal account
of realization applies to it. I use this example to argue that the formal
account of realization sketched by Matthen and Ariew cannot completely
capture the phenomenon of natural selection. I conclude in Sections 5
and 6 by presenting and responding to an argument for the claim that
natural selection cannot provide unified causal explanations.
2. The Grounding Question and the Exclusion Problem. According to Millstein, the proponent of the population-level causal view does not “deny
that populations are composed of individuals or that causes are acting
on those individuals. Nor [does she] deny that individual-level causal
events (living, dying, and reproducing) are in some sense responsible for
selection. What [she denies] is that such individual-level causal events
constitute the selection process itself” (2006, 650). In claiming that individual-level causal events are “in some sense responsible for selection,”
Millstein rightly rejects a strong emergentist view according to which
natural selection is a novel force that appears in populations of organisms.
Yet this appears to sit uneasily with the claim that these individual-level
causal events do not ‘constitute’ the selection process. The apparent tension in this passage suggests a crude version of the exclusion problem; if
individual-level causal events are responsible for selection, what ‘causal
work’ is left for the distinct population-level process of selection to do?
In order to state the problem more precisely, note that individual-level
causal events (as long as they are individuated partially in terms of the
environment in which they take place) must constitute (determine or
ground) the selection process. Otherwise, the population-level causal view
would violate plausible completeness and exclusion principles.2 In this
2. Thus I disagree with the following passage from Reisman and Forber: “First off,
we want to be clear that we readily accept that there are individual-level causes that
operate and that can explain the results of the Dobzhansky and Pavlovsky experiment.
However, we think that in addition to these individual-level causes, there are also
population-level causes and that is what drift and selection are” (2005, 1120, my
emphasis).

https://doi.org/10.1086/522900 Published online by Cambridge University Press

