372

When Metaphysics Meets Biology

their transformations the possibility of an understanding of the focal phenomena. In 1795, Goethe indeed visited the Botanical Garden in Naples and had the
intuition of the UrPflanze. He recalls that at this time with Herder they discussed
Kant’s “archeology of nature,” and added that, starting from his revelation, they
could launch the “bold adventure of reason” that Kant had proscribed.
At first glance, one sees here the ambition toward generality, which asserts a
progression from the simplest to more complex species, starting from raw matter. Herder had such a view, which was strongly rejected by Kant several times,
as we saw. But Goethe’s idea does not stop here. The whole point of his analysis
lies in the shift from a mechanistic understanding of explanation, which requires,
as Kant does, a mereologically based account of the processes at stake, toward a
formal understanding of explanation, which leaves mechanisms out of touch and
focuses on the ideal transformations of form.51
From this viewpoint, the general deployment of the biological kingdom based
on nature does not stumble over the lack of any direct evidence of “heteronymic
univocal generation,” since we do not need any actual production of a form
by another to conceive of the general transformation process. It is like the leaf
that turns calyx and pistil: all those transformations support the actuality of the
plants, but are not actual mechanistic operations.
Granted, I emphasized the affinity between Kant’s regulative principles and
Goethe’s transcendental leaf ((1) in §3.2). But where Kant subordinates a classical mechanistic explanatory program to the originary organization, and therefore
stumbles over the lack of available evidence (for generatio univoca heteronyma)
and the epistemic boundary between raw matter and organized beings, Goethe allows himself the transcendental leaf, then the UrPflanze and the Urbild
as transcendental figures whose metamorphoses have to be traced back geometrically, and even from the raw matter if needed. From the perspective of a
non-mechanistic explanation the distinction between raw and organized matter
is not relevant any more.
As a consequence, Goethe’s teleology is not teleomechanism. The mechanistic explanatory project is now left aside, in favor of another kind of explanatory
program, purely geometrical or topological. With Nassar (2014), one should also
emphasize that, conceived of by Goethe, this program relies on the power of
imagination, and therefore calls for the Goethean identity between knowledge
and art, biology and poetry:
The organism, however, does not develop as separate parts, but as a whole. In
order to grasp the organism, then, one must not perceive its parts in isolation,
but see how they are connected to one another—that is, grasp the relations
between the parts and the transitions from one part to the next. It is only
through the imagination that one can discern these transitions and thus discern
how each part is a modification of the one preceding it.
(p.62)

