156

:

Wesley C. Salmon

statements of empirical science are distinguished from metaphysical
statements and from tautologies. The choice of falsifiability over verifiability as the criterion of demarcation is motivated by a long familiar fact—
namely, it is possible to falsify a universal generalization by means of one
negative instance, while it is impossible to verify a universal generalization by any limited number of positive instances. This, incidentally, is
the meaning of the old saw which is so often made into complete
nonsense: “The exception proves the rule.” In this context, a rule is a
universal generalization, and the term “to prove” means archaically “to
test.” The exception (i.e., the negative instance) proves (ie., tests) the
rule (i.e., the universal generalization), not by showing it to be true, but
by showing it to be false. There is no kind of positive instance to prove
(i.e., test) the rule, for positive instances are completely indecisive.
Scientific hypotheses, as already noted, are general in form, so they are
amenable to falsification but not verification.
Popper thus holds that falsifiability is the hallmark of empirical
science. The aim of empirical science is to set forth theories to stand the
test of every possible serious attempt at falsification. Scientific theories
are hypotheses or conjectures; they are general statements designed to
explain the world and make it intelligible, but they are never to be
regarded as final truths. Their status is always that of tentative conjecture, and they must continually face the severest possible criticism. The
function of the theoretician is to propose scientific conjectures; the
function of the experimentalist is to devise every possible way of

falsifying these theoretical hypotheses. The attempt to confirm hypotheses is no part of the aim of science.**
General hypotheses by themselves do not entail any predictions of
particular events, but they do in conjunction with statements of initial
conditions. The laws of planetary motion in conjunction with statements
about the relative positions and velocities of the earth, sun, moon, and

planets enable us to predict a solar eclipse. The mode of inference is
deduction. We have a high degree of intersubjective agreement concerning the initial conditions,

and we

likewise

can

obtain

intersubjective

agreement as to whether the sun’s disc was obscured at the predicted
time and place. If the predicted fact fails to occur, the theory has suffered
falsification. Again, the mode of inference is deduction. If the theory
were true, then, given the truth of the statements of initial conditions, the
prediction would have to be true. The prediction, as it happens, is false;
therefore, the theory is false. This is the familiar principle of modus
tollens; it is, according to Popper, the only kind of inference available for

