Scientific Discovery and Psychology of Problem Solving

:

29

processes of which the thinker is aware. It assumes, further, that the organization of the totality of processes, conscious and unconscious, is
fundamentally serial rather than parallel in time.
Our examination of the phenomena of incubation and illumination
and their explanation will proceed in several stages. First, I shall describe
briefly the phenomena themselves. Second, I shall consider the question
of why the phenomena should be regarded as surprising and in what
sense they require special explanation. Finally, the information-processing theory of problem solving will be applied to provide an explanation
of the main features of incubation and illumination.
The phenomena themselves are relatively simple, and their occurrence
is well documented. In the case of many important scientific discoveries
(we do not know in what proportion of all cases), the discoverer reports
three main stages in the progress of his inquiry. The first stage, which
Hadamard calls “preparation,” involves conscious, prolonged investigation that is more or less unsuccessful in solving, or sometimes even satisfactorily framing, the problem. Ultimately, frustration becomes intense,
and the problem is dropped from conscious attention. Some time later,
often suddenly and with little or no warning (as in the instance reported
by Poincaré), or immediately upon awakening from sleep, the central idea for the solution presents itself to the conscious mind, only the
details remaining to be worked out. The period between this illumination and the preceding preparation is the incubation period.
While there is little question about the phenomena, they provide no
clues as to what goes on during incubation. In the absence of a fullfledged theory of problem solving, one can fill that period with almost

any imaginable activity. Illumination is a vivid experience for the person
who experiences it, because he is given no hint as to what occasioned the
problem solution. Worse, since the incubation processes apparently go on

independently of his conscious efforts to solve the problem (and best
after these efforts have ceased), the experience gives him few cues as to
what he should do when he next encounters a difficult problem—other
than to “sleep on it.” He must wait until the god decides to seize him.
We can see readily why the phenomenon should be puzzling and sur-

prising to the illuminatee. The solution to a problem that has resisted
his hardest efforts suddenly, and without further work, reveals itself to
his conscious mind. The notions of continuity in space and time are intrinsic to most of our ideas of causation, and illumination appears to violate
this continuity. One must say “appears” because, of course, the laws are

only violated in the way they are violated when a magician produces a

