14

Coordinates on a Straight Line and in a Plane

§ 2. Coordinates on a Line.
The Number Axis
4. In this article we shall describe a method which permits
us to determine the position oj points on an arbitrarily chosen
straight line by ..the specification of numbers.
Let there be given an arbitrary straight line a. We next choose
a segment as the unit of length, assign a positive direction to the
line a (thereby making it an axis), and mark some point on this
line by the letter 0.
Let us now agree to define the coordinate of any point M on
the axis a as the value of the segment OM. The point 0 will be
called the origin of coordinates; the coordinate of the origin itself
is equal to zero.
The specification of the coordinate of a point M completely
determines the position of M on the given line. For, the modulus
of the coordinate, i. e. |OAf|, is the distance o( M from the (pre­
assigned) point 0 , while the sign of the coordinate, i. e., the sign
of the number OM, gives the direction in which the point M lies
relative to the point 0; if the coordinate is positive, then M lies
in the positive direction from 0; if the coordinate is negative,
then M lies in the negative direction from 0; if the coordinate is
zero, then M coincides with O. (All this immediately follows from
the definition of the value of a segment of an axis; see Art. 2.)
Imagine that the straight line a is drawn horizontally before
us and is positively directed to the right. The location of points
of the line a, according to the sign of their coordinates, may then
be described as follows: Points with positive coordinates lie to
the right of the origin 0, and points with negative coordinates, to
the left.
The coordinate of an arbitrary point is generally denoted by
the letter x. In cases when several points are considered, they are
often denoted by one letter having different subscripts, say Afi,
Ma, ■■■, Mn\ then the coordinates of these points are also denoted
by one letter with corresponding subscripts: xu x2, . . . , xn.
To show briefly that a given point has a given coordinate,
the latter is enclosed in parentheses and written next to the sym­
bol of the point itself, as for example, M, (*[), M2(jc2), . . . , M„ (xn).
5. We shall now prove two simple but important theorems
concerning an axis to which a coordinate system has been attached.
Theorem 1. For any two points M i(*i) and M2(x2) of an axis,
we always have the relation

M:M2= x2 x v
—

( 1)

