344

SANDRA D. MITCHELL

resultant outcome. Under some values of the components, it may be that
the contribution of genetic variation is much stronger than variant learning
experiences and hence completely determines the pattern of foragers in a
colony or between colonies. Other times, the reverse might be true, and still
other times, the interaction of the two components is operative in generating the pattern. Interactions may take different forms, including additive,
swamping, damping and amplifying. Thus the operation of a single causal
component, its contribution to the resultant effect, can be contingent not
just on background standing conditions, but also on the other causal mechanisms operating at the same time. The nature of the contingency may vary
with the different values that the variables in the component mechanisms
take.
Redundancy and phase change phenomena can also be present in complex biological systems (see discussion above). These offer two more types
of complex contingencies that have import for understanding the range
of contexts in which the regular behavior of a set of variables may be
disrupted. In systems with redundant processes, the contribution of any
one may be elicited or moderated by the operation of another. For phase
change, like non-linear dynamical processes, the nature of the function
describing the behavior of variables may itself change under certain values
of the variables or changes in external conditions.

5. THE PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES

I have presented a variety of different ways in which causal dependencies
in biology are contingent. This is damning of biology only if one retains
the strict notion that laws must be universal and exceptionless. Instead, we
can turn the question around and ask not whether biological claims can be
transformed into strict laws, but rather when and how do biological claims
perform the functions that laws are thought to serve? That is, how can less
than strict laws explain, predict and assist in intervention? Recent work on
causal dependence has done much to develop answers.
In his 2001 and his paper in this issue, Woodward applies his notion
of explanation being grounded not by universal, exceptionless laws, but by
generalizations that are invariant under intervention to cases in biology. He
argues that his notion of invariance is both distinct from my idea of stability of conditions upon which relations hold and that invariance is what is
needed for explanation, not stability. I want to explore Woodward’s argument, to see where and why the disagreement occurs. First of all, there are
many similarities in Woodward’s and my account of laws. We both reject
universality and exceptionlessness as necessary for knowledge claims to be

