334

SANDRA D. MITCHELL

generalizations less than universal in scope, but which can, nevertheless,
support counterfactuals.
My strategy is somewhat different: I recommend that we look more
closely at the character of the contingencies of the causal dependencies in
biological systems that are often lumped into a single abstract concept of
‘contingency’ and singled out as the culprit preventing biological science
to be lawful (Beatty 1997). I have argued elsewhere (1997, 2000) that general truths we discover about the world vary with respect to their degree
of contingency on the conditions upon which the relationships described
depend. Indeed, it is true that most of the laws of fundamental physics are
more generally applicable, i.e., are more stable over changes in context, in
space and time, than are the causal relations we discover hold in the biological world. They are closer to the ideal causal connections that we chose
to call ‘laws’. Yet, few of even these can escape the need for the ceterus
paribus clause to render them logically true. Indeed, Cartwright has argued
that we can’t find a single instantiation of these laws and Earman et al. in
this volume admit that we have yet to identify (or at least have evidence
that we have identified) a law of physics. What’s going on here?
The difference between fundamental physics and the special sciences is
not between a domain of laws and a domain of no laws. Yet, I would agree,
there are differences and those differences can inform our understanding of
not only the special sciences but of the very notion of a ‘law’ and its function. By broadening the conceptual space in which we can locate the truths
discovered in various scientific pursuits we can better represent the nature
of the actual differences. The interesting issue for biological knowledge
is not so much whether it is or isn’t just like knowledge of fundamental
physics, but how to characterize the types of contingent, complex causal
dependencies found in that domain.
Recent developments in understanding scientific causal claims take as
their starting point less than ideal knowledge. They explore how to draw
causal inferences from statistical data, as well as how to determine the
extent of our knowledge and range of application from the practices of
experimentation. (Spirtes et al., 1993; Glymour 2001; Woodward 2000,
2001, 2002). When we see that some relationship holds here and now
for this population in this environment, what can we say about the next
population in the next environment? These new approaches recognize the
less-than-universal character of many causal structures. If explanatory generalizations were universal, then when we detect a system in which A is
correlated with B, and we determine that this is a causal relationship, we
could infer that A would cause B in every system. But we often cannot. The
difficulty goes beyond the correlation-causation relationship. Even when

