46

Metaphysics

for practices of modal commitment and discourse in science in a way that
satisﬁes empiricists, pragmatists, and other theorists who regard metaphysics
with suspicion. Such views are regarded as naturalistic because they decline to
pursue empirically intractable and metaphysically lofty questions about the
metaphysics of modality and instead attend to the empirically tractable domains
of cognition and language use.
These views fall under a broader category that we will label ‘projectivism’,
since they tend to agree that our modal theorising is ultimately a matter of
a projection of some aspect of our own cognitive lives. Fellow members of this
broader category include Blackburn (1993) and Thomasson (2020). While
projectivist views are of independent interest, we think they lack direct bearing
on the kind of modal naturalism we have in mind. The naturalism involved in
a projectivist outlook is a naturalism at the metaphilosophical level, which
places empirically tractable practices at the centre of inquiry, rather than
a naturalism at the epistemological level, which prescribes a science-centred
epistemology for modality conceived as a domain of mind-independent facts.
While we appreciate the spirit of these views and their contribution to our
understanding of the modal content of science, we see modal naturalism as
pursuing different ends. Rather than accounting for modal dimensions of scientiﬁc
practice in a metaphysically minimal way, the modal naturalist regards science as
an important source of modal metaphysical knowledge. Nevertheless, projectivism and modal naturalism in our sense are not incompatible; one could simultaneously hold that while modality itself is of our own making, nonetheless we have
made modality in such a way that modal naturalism is the correct account of its
ﬁrst-order epistemology. However, there is at least some tension here: some central
motivations for modal naturalism, concerning our epistemic access to modal facts
and their rational relevance to us, seem to be undercut by a projectivist account of
modal reality that renders the access question and the relevance question misconceived (Thomasson 2020). Our modal naturalist assumes a straightforwardly
realist treatment of modal facts and takes seriously questions about the knowability
and relevance of these facts.

7.5 Modal Science
While none of the views we have discussed so far have been clearly identiﬁable
as forms of modal naturalism, Williamson’s ‘Modal Science’ (2016) more
closely approaches the kind of modal naturalism that we propose. In that
paper, Williamson argues that objective modal knowledge is an integrated
component of scientiﬁc knowledge. Scientiﬁc laws support subjunctive conditionals, and when they do so successfully over time, we have abductive grounds

