52

Metaphysics

Finally, most interpretations of quantum theory involve indeterminism of
some kind. In collapse theories, the dynamics are indeterministic; in manyworlds approaches, there is effective indeterminism from the in-world perspective; and even in hidden-variables approaches like Bohmian mechanics, it
might still be most natural to understand probabilities through an initial
indeterministic chance event (Demarest 2016). Once again, this conﬂicts
with what Kant (1781/1998) argued in the Analogies of Experience to be
a necessary precondition of any possible experience; more generally, determinism was a conceptual pillar of classical physics and not seriously questioned as a framing assumption for modern physics until the rise of quantum
theory. However, it turns out that some of our best interpretations of quantum
theory make it possible for events to occur without their being determined
to occur.
All the aforementioned examples, if they succeed, were discovered to be
possible in virtue of being discovered to be actual. But we can also gain indirect
evidence for the possibility of certain non-actual scenarios. A model of some
physical theory corresponding to the actual world is part of a larger set of
models, and attending to those models can give us evidence for the possibilities
to which they correspond.
For a ﬁrst example of this, it has been argued that string theory gives us
evidence for the possibility of different dimensionalities of effective spacetime, corresponding to different minima of the string theory ‘landscape’ (see
Susskind 2006 for an accessible introduction to the string landscape). In the
string landscape scenario, it is a quantum-mechanically contingent matter
which dimensionality of effective spacetime emerges from the fundamental
higher-dimensional background spacetime; thus insofar as we can get empirical evidence for the string landscape hypothesis, we can get empirical evidence for the possibility of effective spacetimes of dimensionality larger than
our actual 3+1.
A less conjectural example comes from potential super-heavy chemical
elements. No elements with atomic number above 118 have ever been synthesised, and it is quite plausible that, for example, unsepttrium (with atomic
number 173) will never exist in our visible universe. Nonetheless, theoretical
chemists can model at least some of its properties such as energy eigenvalues
to explore how unsepttrium would behave if it were to exist (Fricke and Soff
1977): it is predicted to behave like a highly reactive alkali metal, for the few
microseconds its isotopes could exist before decaying. In these examples, it
seems that theoretical physics and theoretical chemistry can result in genuine
modal discovery that is not simply a logical consequence of a discovery of the
actual.

