36

Metaphysics

When it comes to analysing modality reductively, David Lewis (1986) uses
possible worlds to analyse, in the ﬁrst instance, what I shall call ‘combinatorial
modality’, and he then analyses other modalities derivatively. Combinatorial
modality is to be understood as that modality that tracks ways in which matter
and fundamental properties can occupy (be distributed over) a space–time
system. This is importantly silent on de re matters (more on this in
Section 3.1) and, as such, it will be convenient to understand combinatorial
modality, for now, as deﬁned for purely general propositions only.28 For any
purely general p:

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009004596 Published online by Cambridge University Press

□p is true if and only if p is true in all possible worlds.
◊p is true if and only if p is true in some possible world.
For Lewis, possible worlds are concrete in the same sense in which our
world (the actual world) is concrete. They are spatio-temporally uniﬁed, and
also spatio-temporally isolated from one another.29 And there’s a plenitude
of them: there are at least as many of them as (qualitative) ways our world
(and any other concrete world) could be. This plenitude is a necessary
condition for the at least extensional adequacy of the account: if not all
possibilities for our world were witnessed by some world, the left-to-right
direction of the ◊-analysis above would fail. (For instance, if there could be
talking donkeys but no world contained talking donkeys.) Lewis also takes it
to be the case that every (qualitative) way some world is is a possible way for
our world to be, with which he also secures the right-to-left direction of the
account. Once the extensional adequacy is guaranteed, Lewis argues that his
concretism is the only way in which one can hope the possible worlds
analysis of (combinatorial) modality to be reductive.30

debate on possible worlds has progressively faded away in favour of a debate on possibilism vs.
actualism.
28
One might feel inclined to use ‘metaphysical modality’ ambivalently, to include combinatorial
modality too (I myself sometimes do). I have been rightly pressed by a referee, however, that this
is confusing, for a number of good reasons. Among them, metaphysical modality, as I used the
label in Section 2.4.2, is distinctively de re. By contrast, combinatorial modality as introduced
here is distinctively de dicto. It is true nonetheless that Lewis’ worlds are ‘ﬁrst-class metaphysical possibilities’ (in a way reminiscent of what Chalmers (2002, 165) claims for his primarypossible worlds). And yet, these (ﬁrst-class) metaphysical possibilities are purely qualitative
and, for this reason, to avoid unnecessary confusion, it is advantageous not to use the label
‘metaphysical’ to refer to Lewis’ target modality. (See Roca-Royes (2020, Sect. 2) for more on
the Lewisian distinction between qualitative and de re ways for a world to be.)
29
Where ‘spatio-temporal’ should not be interpreted strictly but analogically: allowing for ‘space–
time’ systems that differ from ours (see Lewis (1986, 76, fn. 55)).
30
Lewis’ (1986) On the Plurality of Worlds is a book-length abductive argument for this
claim.

