Modality

9

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009004596 Published online by Cambridge University Press

It follows from the above characterisation that it is Christian-morally necessary
that Cain doesn’t kill Abel. And yet (assuming for the sake of the example that
what we have heard about them is true), Cain killed Abel. We can thus identify
a proposition – Cain doesn’t kill Abel – that is both necessary, in the current
sense of the term, and fails to be true. As such, this proposition alone sufﬁces to
compromise the validity of principle (M), □p→p, for the current modality; and
it doesn’t take much imagination to identify a whole battery of other propositions with the same effect.
Scottish-Legal modality, to give one further example, behaves similarly.
Let us call the Scottish Legal system ‘SLS’. We can then characterise ScottishLegal possibility as that which is compatible with all the elements in SLS.
According to SLS, drink-driving is an offence and, as such, the proposition
that Finley drove home while noticeably drunk is Scottish-Legally impossible.
Despite such status, in a physical sense of ‘possible’, it’s certainly possible for
him – and anyone – to drive home while noticeably drunk. Any instance of
drink-driving in Scotland is proof of the invalidity of principle (M) for the case
of Scottish-Legal modality.
These reasonings generalise to any deontic modality. Indeed, deontic modalities all have in common with doxastic modalities their invalidation of principle
(M): just as there’s no guarantee that people (will) believe truly, there’s also no
guarantee that people (will) do what they deontically must. It is characteristic of
deontic modalities that their musts can typically (in a physical sense) be
transgressed. As we will see in the next section, this feature distinguishes alethic
modalities from deontic modalities.

2.4 Alethic Modalities
In comparison to epistemic modalities, which, as seen in Section 2.2, can be
characterised as dependent upon a given body of knowledge (or beliefs), alethic
modalities can be characterised instead as dependent on a body of truths. And it
is this feature which gives alethic modalities their name – from the ancient
Greek aletheia, for truth. The schema for them is very similar to that in the case
of deontic modalities and, in particular, they share with the deontic family that
they are not relativised to individuals:
p is C-possible if and only if it is (logically) compatible with all the elements in
C (where C is a given set of truths).
There are several questions that soon appear when trying to structurally characterise alethic modalities. An important issue, which will shape our discussion here
and be relevant in much of Section 2.5, can be informed by the following remarks.

