we must know the secret union of soul and body, and the nature of both these substances; by which the one is able to
operate, in so many instances, upon the other.
Secondly, We are not able to move all the organs of the body with a like authority; though we cannot assign any reason
besides experience, for so remarkable a difference between one and the other. Why has the will an influence over the
tongue and fingers, not over the heart or liver? This question would never embarrass us, were we conscious of a power
in the former case, not in the latter. We should then perceive, independent of experience, why the authority of will over
the organs of the body is circumscribed within such particular limits. Being in that case fully acquainted with the power
or force, by which it operates, we should also know, why its influence reaches precisely to such boundaries, and no
farther.
A man, suddenly struck with palsy in the leg or arm, or who had newly lost those members, frequently endeavours,
at first to move them, and employ them, in their usual offices. Here he is as much conscious of power to command
such limbs, as a man in perfect health is conscious of power to actuate any member which remains in its natural state
and condition. But consciousness never deceives. Consequently, neither in the one case nor in the other, are we ever
conscious of any power. We learn the influence of our will from experience alone. And experience only teaches us, how
one event constantly follows another; without instructing us in the secret connexion, which binds them together, and
renders them inseparable.
Thirdly, We learn from anatomy, that the immediate object of power in voluntary motion, is not the member itself
which is moved, but certain muscles, and nerves, and animal spirits, and, perhaps, something still more minute and
more unknown, through which the motion is successively propagated, ere it reach the member itself whose motion is
the immediate object of volition. Can there be a more certain proof, that the power, by which this whole operation is
performed, so far from being directly and fully known by an inward sentiment or consciousness is, to the last degree,
mysterious and unintelligible? Here the mind wills a certain event. Immediately another event, unknown to ourselves,
and totally different from the one intended, is produced: This event produces another, equally unknown: till at last,
through a long succession, the desired event is produced. But if the original power were felt, it must be known: were it
known, its effect also must be known; since all power is relative to its effect. And vice versa, if the effect be not known,
the power cannot be known nor felt. How indeed can we be conscious of a power to move our limbs, when we have no
such power; but only that to move certain animal spirits, which, though they produce at last the motion of our limbs,
yet operate in such a manner as is wholly beyond our comprehension?
We may, therefore, conclude from the whole, I hope, without any temerity, though with assurance; that our idea
of power is not copied from any sentiment or consciousness of power within ourselves, when we give rise to animal
motion, or apply our limbs to their proper use and office. That their motion follows the command of the will is a matter
of common experience, like other natural events: But the power or energy by which this is effected, like that in other
natural events, is unknown and inconceivable.
Shall we then assert, that we are conscious of a power or energy in our own minds, when, by an act or command of
our will, we raise up a new idea, fix the mind to the contemplation of it, turn it on all sides, and at last dismiss it for some
other idea, when we think that we have surveyed it with sufficient accuracy? I believe the same arguments will prove,
that even this command of the will gives us no real idea of force or energy.
First, It must be allowed, that, when we know a power, we know that very circumstance in the cause, by which it is
enabled to produce the effect: for these are supposed to be synonymous. We must, therefore, know both the cause and
effect, and the relation between them. But do we pretend to be acquainted with the nature of the human soul and the
nature of an idea, or the aptitude of the one to produce the other? This is a real creation; a production of something
out of nothing: which implies a power so great, that it may seem, at first sight, beyond the reach of any being, less than
infinite. At least it must be owned, that such a power is not felt, nor known, nor even conceivable by the mind. We only
feel the event, namely, the existence of an idea, consequent to a command of the will: but the manner, in which this
operation is performed, the power by which it is produced, is entirely beyond our comprehension.
Secondly, The command of the mind over itself is limited, as well as its command over the body; and these limits are
not known by reason, or any acquaintance with the nature of cause and effect, but only by experience and observation,
as in all other natural events and in the operation of external objects. Our authority over our sentiments and passions
David Hume’s (1711–1776) Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding | 160

