AN ADEQUACY-FOR-PURPOSE VIEW

459

An adequacy-for-purpose view has been advocated by both scientists and
philosophers. For example, a US National Research Council report characterizes model evaluation as “the process of deciding whether and when a
model is suitable for its intended purpose” (NRC 2007, 3; see also Caswell
1976; Rykiel 1996; Jakeman, Letcher, and Norton 2006; Baumberger,
Knutti, and Hadorn 2017). Taper, Staples, and Shepard (2008, 358), discussing modeling in environmental sciences, note “a growing recognition that
models should be selected based on their ability to answer questions of interest,” rather than on some overall measure of their ﬁt to observational data.
Among philosophers, Parker (2010, 287) recommends that model evaluation
be understood as “an activity that aims to determine whether a model is adequate for one or more purposes of interest.” Currie (2018) adopts a similar
view and points to philosophical work on the evaluation of artifacts as a potential resource (e.g., Hilpinen 2011).
An adequacy-for-purpose view is attractive for a number of reasons. It is
a natural accompaniment to a prominent way of thinking about scientiﬁc
models, which emphasizes that models are not just representations but also
tools that are selected and used for particular epistemic and practical purposes
(e.g., Morrison and Morgan 1999; Giere 2004, 2010; Boon and Knuuttila
2009; Parker 2010; Knuuttila 2011; Currie 2018). In addition, it readily accounts for some prima facie puzzling features of modeling practice, including
the fact that modelers sometimes misrepresent a target, even when they could
avoid doing so; judicious misrepresentation can promote the achievement
of some epistemic and practical aims (Wimsatt 2007, chap. 6; van Fraassen
2008, chap. 1). For example, a modeler might omit from her computer model
a (representation of a) particular causal process known to be operating in the
target, in order to gain insight into its contribution to the target’s behavior. Finally, an adequacy-for-purpose view can help to combat overconﬁdence in
modeling results, just as Oreskes et al. sought to do. This is because, on an
adequacy-for-purpose view, evaluators must consider what evidence there
is that a model is adequate for the particular purpose at hand; past successes
of the model might not be especially relevant.
Despite its attractions, however, an adequacy-for-purpose view of model
evaluation has not been the subject of sustained philosophical analysis. A
number of basic questions remain at best only partly addressed, including
What does it mean for a model to be adequate-for-purpose? What makes a
model adequate-for-purpose? How does assessing a model’s adequacy-forpurpose differ from assessing its representational accuracy? This article attempts to make progress in answering these questions. In addition, responses
are given to some objections that might be raised against an adequacy-forpurpose view. The aim is to further develop, and to defend, a particularly
promising view of model evaluation.

https://doi.org/10.1086/708691 Published online by Cambridge University Press

