102

5

The Inferential View

model is inaccurate, but appeals to a user’s corrective abilities to justify their use of
it: “Since models often misrepresent some aspect of the system or other, it is usually
up to the user’s competence, judgment, and background knowledge to use the model
successfully in spite of the fact that the model misrepresents certain aspects of the
system” (Contessa 2007, p. 60).
Ducheyne (2012) provides a variant of Interpretation that has a similar motivation to Bolinksa’s. The notion of an analytic interpretation allows for arbitrary connections between aspects of carriers and aspects of their targets (Bolinska’s specific
objection is that it is these arbitrary connections that allow for interpretations of
carriers in terms of targets that she takes to be not epistemic representations at all,
rather than drastic misrepresentations).20 Ducheyne therefore tries to constrain the
sorts of connections between carrier and target features that analytic interpretations,
at least in science, should make. The central idea is that it develops Interpretation
with the requirement that each relevant relation specified in the interpretation, holds
precisely in the model – a condition that Ducheyne explicates by saying that the
model is “an ideal ceteris paribus and ceteris absentibus state of affairs” (ibid.,
p. 83) – and corresponds to the same relation in the world which, however, holds
only approximately (with respect to a given purpose) in the target.21 For example,
the low mass of an actual pendulum’s string approximates the masslessness of the
string in the model. The one-to-one correspondence between (relevant) objects and
relations in the model and target is retained, but the notion of a user taking relations
in the model to denote relations in the target, is replaced with the idea that the relations in the target are approximations of the ones they correspond to. Ducheyne
calls this the Pragmatic Limiting Case account of scientific representation (the
pragmatic element comes from the fact that the level of approximation required is
determined by the purpose of the model user). This imposes stringent constraints on
possible interpretations and thereby undercuts cases like Bolinska’s hockey puck.
However, if this account is to succeed in explaining how distortive idealisations
are scientific representations, then more needs to be said about how a target relation
can “approximate” a model relation. Ducheyne implicitly relies on the fact that relations are such that “we can determine the extent to which [they hold] empirically”
(2012, p. 83, emphasis added). This suggests that he has quantifiable relations in
mind, and that what it means for a relation r in the target to approximate a relation
r’ in the model is a matter of comparing numerical values, where a model user’s
purpose determines how close they must be if the former is to count as an

Ducheyne (2012, p. 80) also claims that Contessa’s account fails to distinguish scientific representation from epistemic representation more generally (and he offers an example of using colours
in a picture of a group of runners to represent the finishing position of each runner). According to
Ducheyne, the example “meets Contessa’s requirements for analytic interpretation, but it does not
seem to qualify as a scientific representation” (ibid.). Since, as noted in Sect. 5.1, Contessa is not
attempting to demarcate scientific representation from epistemic representation more generally
this is not a criticism of Contessa’s proposal.
21
Following Ducheyne we use “model” rather than “carrier” to indicate that his discussion is
focused on scientific models, rather than epistemic representations more generally.
20

