4

Philosophy of Biology

and statistical models. Informal models can be written, verbal, pictorial,
and even mental. As cognitive scientists have demonstrated over the last
decades, much of how we operate in the world is based on mental models.
Thus, for any reader of this Element, there will be a mental model of how
they understand evolution to work, which may be more or less accurate,
given how widespread misunderstandings about evolution are among not
only students but also instructors (Abenes & Caballes, 2020; De Santis,
2021; Gregory, 2009; Nehm & Reilly, 2007; Nelson, 2008).
But before we discuss the diversity of models that evolutionary
­biologists use to advance our understanding of evolutionary processes in
Section 3, we need to answer the question of what ‘models’ are and what
it means to ‘model’. Clearly, we cannot just refer to mathematical entities
and ­activities if models can also be informal. But ostensive ­definitions
(i.e. ­definition by pointing out examples) that merely list a variety of
models or model types are also not sufficient, since they ­provide us with
no deeper conceptual understanding of the general category. However,
is there anything that unifies entities that can range so widely? Can we
offer a definition of these terms by identifying necessary and sufficient
­conditions that capture the essences of ‘models’ and ‘modelling’? Some
philosophers, such as Nelson Goodman, have expressed scepticism about
this question:
Few terms are used in popular and scientific discourse more promiscuously than ‘model’. A model is something to be admired or emulated, a
pattern, a case in point, a type, a prototype, a specimen, a mock-up,
a mathematical description – almost anything from a naked blonde
to a quadratic equation – and may bear to what it models almost any
­relation of symbolization. (Nelson Goodman, 1976, p. 171)

Given this, there appears to be nothing inherent to the properties of those
entities called ‘models’ that makes them models. Philosophers might call
this the ontology of models (i.e. their metaphysical structure of reality
similar to how H2O = water). Instead, philosophers have largely tried to
define ‘models’ in terms of their function or purpose in science. But what
could this function be?
While the philosophy of models literature is full of disagreements and
the recognition of a wide range of potential functions for models, there is
one answer to this question that has come closest to achieving something
resembling consensus, and that is: the function is to represent (Downes,
2020; Odenbaugh, 2018; Teller, 2001). An early expression of this idea came
from Hughes who argued that the ‘characteristic – perhaps the only characteristic – that all theoretical models have in common is that they provide
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 189.242.188.26, on 25 Sep 2025 at 00:23:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009459983

