Reconsidering Representation

265

some models are useful while others are not, and they would agree that saltshakers
and left hands are useless. Yet they insist that “the questions about the utility of
these representational vehicles are questions about the pragmatics of things that
are representational vehicles, not questions about their representational status per
se” (ibid., 75), where “vehicle” denotes what we previously called the carrier of a
representation (Section 6.2).
To assess the merits of this take on representation we start by enquiring into
the relationship between General Griceanism and stipulative fiat. Even though
Callender and Cohen mention the two in the same breath, they are actually separate doctrines. As Toon points out (2010a, 77–78, 2012b, 244), General Griceanism requires that some account be given of how non-fundamental representations
relate to mental states, but the position is not committed to that account being of
any particular kind, much less to it being stipulative fiat. So one can be a proponent of General Griceanism without being a proponent of stipulative fiat. Scientific representation can, in principle, be reduced to mental representation in many
different ways. In fact, the more developed versions of both the morphism account
and the similarity account of scientific representation (as well as other accounts
that we encounter later in this chapter) are consonant with a General Gricean outlook in that they see an agent’s intentions as a constitutive ingredient of an account
of scientific representation. Agents designate intended targets, choose objects to
be used as models, formulate hypotheses concerning the relation between models
and targets, and evaluate these with respect to certain goals, purposes, and standards of accuracy. These actions are the result of an agent’s mental activities. The
relevant mental activities are just more complex than merely stipulating that M
represents T and leaving it at that. Yet, the Gricean can still argue that the primary
task of a theory of fundamental representation is to identify the mental states
that correspond to these activities. It is then simply a question of one’s research
interests whether one sees an analysis of the mental states or the scrutiny of, say,
similarity claims as the more pertinent problem.
This said, how does stipulative fiat fare as an account of scientific representation? Callender and Cohen support stipulative fiat by noting that anything can
represent anything else (ibid., 73). This is correct. Objects that function representationally do not belong to a particular category of things.5 Anything from an
assembly of toothpicks to a second order differential equation can, in principle,
be a scientific representation. But that anything can, in principle, be a scientific
representation does not imply that a mere act of stipulation is sufficient to turn
anything into an actual scientific representation. The most obvious problem of
stipulative fiat is that it violates the Surrogative Reasoning Condition. As a number of commentators have noticed,6 one can stipulate that the saltshaker represents Madagascar or that the espresso machine represents the Big Bang, but these
representations are cognitively inert because the account makes no provision for
claims about Madagascar or the Big Bang to be extracted from reasoning about
the carriers of the representation. Bare stipulation does not ground surrogative
reasoning. As we have seen, the ability to use a model to reason about its target is

