https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108754750 Published online by Cambridge University Press

36

Decision Theory and Philosophy

the other, it’s neither irrational to accept nor irrational to turn down the trade at
node 2.
Taking this into account at node 1, we find that turning the trade down has
a rationally allowed outcome (A−− ) that is less preferred than the prospect of
accepting the trade (A− ) but turning the trade down cannot lead (via choices
that aren’t irrational) to a prospect that is preferred to the prospect of accepting
the trade. So, by precautionary backward induction, you accept the trade at
node 1. Alternatively, we could rely on Minimal Unidimensional Precaution,
which also prescribes going up at node 1 (since A−− is a souring of A− and you
do not prefer B to A−− ). Hence you accept the first trade and end up with A− ,
even though you could have kept A for free.
The Precaution Money Pump isn’t BI-terminating, since going down at
node 2 is allowed by backward induction and would be followed by the choice
at node 3. Even so, we can still defend the prescriptions of precautionary backward induction or Minimal Unidimensional Precaution combined with standard
backward induction without assuming that you retain your rationality and your
trust in your rationality at nodes that can only be reached by irrational choices.
As before, we only need the assumption that, at nodes that can be reached
without making any irrational choices, you retain (i) your rationality and (ii)
your trust in your rationality at nodes that can be reached without making any
irrational choices.
Assume, for proof by contradiction, that each of nodes 2–4 can be reached
without making any irrational choices. Then, at nodes 1–4, you retain your
rationality and your trust in your rationality at these nodes. Hence, at node 4,
you might choose either of A and B− , since neither prospect is preferred to
the other (so neither option is rationally prohibited at node 4). Taking this into
account with precautionary backward induction, we find that it’s irrational to
turn down the trade at node 3. Alternatively, we could rely on Minimal Unidimensional Precaution, which also entails that it’s irrational to turn down the
trade at node 3 (since B− is a souring of B and you do not prefer A to B− ).
But this conclusion, that it’s irrational to turn down the trade at node 3, contradicts our assumption that each of nodes 2–4 can be reached without making
any irrational choices.
Assume next, for proof by contradiction, that each of nodes 2 and 3 can be
reached without making any irrational choices. Then, at nodes 1–3, you retain
your rationality and your trust in your rationality at these nodes. Since we have
already shown that it’s irrational to go down at (at least) one of nodes 1–3, it
must be irrational to go down at node 3. So it’s rationally required to accept
the trade at node 3. So you would accept the trade at node 3. Then, taking this
prediction into account at node 2, the choice at that node is effectively between

