Money-Pump Arguments

5

are offered a second trade from C to B. Since you prefer B to C, you also accept
this second trade. Finally, after the second trade, you are offered a third trade
from B to A− , where A− is just like A except that you have less money and
(2) A ≻ A− ≻ B.
We can let the payment be monetary to fit the exploitation framing, but the
main point is that A− is less preferred than A by being certainly inferior with
respect to some dimension you care about and the same in other respects. 15
Let a souring of a prospect X be a prospect that is just like X except that it is
certainly inferior in a dimension the agent cares about. (And let a sweetening of
a prospect X be a prospect that is just like X except that it is certainly superior
in a dimension the agent cares about.)
That there is an A− like this follows from (1) by the following requirement
of rationality: 16
Unidimensional Continuity of Preference If X ≻ Y, then there is a prospect X − such that (i) X − is a souring of X and (ii) X ≻ X − ≻ Y.

The idea is that, if you (strictly) prefer X to Y, you must prefer X with
some margin. So there should be some, perhaps minimal, amount you’re willing to pay to get X rather than Y. 17 This is what blocks trivial responses to the

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108754750 Published online by Cambridge University Press

15

There’s no special relationship between money and rationality. If you don’t prefer having more
money, there’s nothing irrational about freely losing money. See Gustafsson 2013, pp. 462–4.
16 Hansson 1993, p. 478. Note that this principle differs from Continuity, which we won’t assume.
(We will defend Continuity in Section 6.) Unidimensional Continuity of Preferences, in contrast to Continuity, does not cover continuity of probability for preferences over prospects.
(This also applies to Weak Insensitivity to Souring in Section 3 and Unidimensional Continuity
of Dispreference in Section 4.2.)
17 It may seem strange that a requirement of rationality would have any implications for what
things exist. Note, however, that the things that are mentioned in the requirement are only taken
to exist as possibilia, not as concrete things. The same worry about existential implications also
applies to Continuity (see Section 6). A potential solution is to replace the existential quantifier
with a ‘some’ quantifier that lacks existential implications. See Priest 2005, pp. 11–14. Another
worry is that Unidimensional Continuity of Preference prohibits rational agents from caring
exclusively about discrete things in final outcomes (such as money in the smallest possible
denomination or the smallest noticeable differences of pleasure). To deal with this worry, we
could rely on the following probabilistic variant:
Stochastic Unidimensional Continuity of Preference If X ≻ Y, then there is a prospect X − and some probability p such that (i) X − is a souring of X, (ii) 0 ≤ p < 1, and
(iii) XpX − ≻ Y.
Here, XpX − is a prospect consisting in a lottery between X and X − such that X occurs with
probability p and X − occurs with probability 1 − p. If we rely on this alternative principle,
the exploitation would only be probabilistic. If a money-pump set-up makes you choose XpX −
over X, then the exploiter only gets your money with some probability but they still risk nothing.
These adjustments could also be made for the other principles we’ll assume about the existence
of sourings and sweetenings.

