162

More Precisely

information as it can about the other. Just as we defined the effective
information from A to B, so we can define the effective information from B to
A. This quantity EI(B —> A) is I(B*; A). Now the effective information
between A and B is EI(A ↔ B) = EI(A →B) + EI(B →A). The effective
information between A and B represents how tightly they are informationally
coupled to each other. It is the strength of their coupling.
The different bipartitions of 8 have different strengths. Among all these
bipartitions, at least one is the weakest (there may be many tied for weakest).
Just as the strength of a chain is the strength of its weakest link, so the
integration of S is the strength of its weakest bipartition. But here we need to be
careful. Since the bipartitions may have parts with very different sizes, we
cannot compare them directly. To compare them, we need to normalize them.
Let EI*(A ↔ B) be EI(A ↔ B) divided by the minimum of the two entropies
H(A*) and H(B*). The weakest partition is the one for which EI*(A ↔ B) is
minimum. Once we find the weakest partition, we can say that the integration of
the system 8 is the (non-normalized) effective information at that partition.
Thus (13(8) is the effective information at this weakest link. Thus CNS) is EI(A
↔ B) if and only if EI*(A ↔ B) is minimum over all bipartitions (A, B) in S’l‘.

It’s clear that <1) is a way of measuring a certain kind of complexity of a system.
It is less clear whether (1) measures the consciousness of a system. Of course,
Tononi offers many arguments that <1) does measure consciousness. Whether he
is right or wrong, the use of the mathematics helps to demystify consciousness.
Although we have talked about defining (I) for physical systems, its definition
does not in fact depend on physicality. No physical concepts were used in the
definition of (D. The quantity (1) can be defined both for material brains and (if
they exist) immaterial minds.
1

Exercises
Exercises for this chapter can be found on the Broadview website.

