Probability
the extension of “X is F”

125

{x |x is F }.

All this leads directly to the concept of probabilities for sentences. On any
given choice, the probability that “The chosen object is red” is the probability
that the chosen object is in the set of red objects. And that probability is the
number of the set of red objects divided by the number of objects in the bag. In
our set-theoretic language, it is P(Red). That is, P(“X is red”) = P(Red). Since
writing the quotes in “X is F” is both annoying and unnecessary when writing
P(“X is F”), we drop them. Generally, for any predicate F,
P(X is F) = P(F).

We can go on to define probabilities for conjunctions of sentences. Consider “X
is red and X is translucent”. This is just the probability that X is in the
intersection of the set of red marbles with the set of translucent marbles. As a
rule,
P(XisF&XisG)=P(FﬂG).

Disjunctions follow naturally too. Consider “X is blue or X is translucent”.
This is just the probability that X is in the union of the set of blue marbles with
the set of translucent marbles. As a rule,
P(X isForX is G): P(F U G).

Negations are straightforward. Consider “X is not opaque”. This is just the
probability that X is in the complement of the set of opaque marbles. We denote
the complement of set F relative to the assumed background sample space as —F.
Hence
P(X is not F)

P(—F).

7.2 Subjective Probability Functions
Any linguistically competent human mind is able to consider sentences in some
language (which might, without too much worry, be called its language of
thought or mentalese). For example, you can affirm that “Socrates was a
philosopher” and deny that “No man is mortal”. For precision, let’s define a
language we’ll call Extensional English. The vocabulary of Extensional English
splits into constants and predicates. The constants are all the names (proper
nouns) in ordinary English. The predicates are the nouns, adjectives, and verbs
in ordinary English. The grammar of Extensional English is the grammar of the
predicate calculus. Here are some sentences in Extensional English:

philosopher( Socrates);

