106

5 The Hierarchy of Sets

Axiom 5.5 and Exercise 5.8 guarantee that every rank is a transitive set of ranks.
Now we want to prove the converse.
Exercise 5.9 Show that if x is a set of ranks, then x ∨ ρ(x).
Theorem 5.9 Every transitive set of ranks is a rank.
Proof Suppose x is a transitive set of ranks. We want to show that x has the same
members as ρ(x). Suppose α ⇒ ρ(x). Then, by Theorem 5.8, ρ(α) ⇒ ρ(x). That is,
x outranks α. So, by Theorem 5.6, α cannot outrank every member of x. Suppose β
is a member of x not outranked by α. Then, by Exercise 5.2, β ⇒
/ α. So, by Theorem
5.7, either α ⇒ β or α = β. In the each case, α ⇒ x. (In the first case, because x is
transitive.) We conclude that ρ(x) ∨ x. Now apply Exercise 5.9 and Axiom 5.4. 

5.2 Two Models
At the beginning of this chapter, I noted that we will explore interpretability relations
between theories. We will consider interpretations or translations that carry us from
one theory to another. We can treat this as an entirely syntactic exercise, assigning
sentences to sentences without ever indicating what those sentences mean. I hope
it will not be too confusing if we follow established usage and (as in Sect. 2.3)
talk about “interpretations” of another sort, interpretations that offer readings of
individual theories rather than mappings between theories. In such a reading of our
set theory, we would (1) specify our universe of discourse (we would indicate
what we are discussing when we say “every set”, “any sets,” “some set”, or “some
sets”); (2) indicate which objects in our universe are members of which objects; and
(3) indicate which objects in our universe are the ranks of which objects. Recall,
from Chap. 2, that a model of our set theory would be an interpretation that makes
all our axioms true. At the moment, our only axioms are 5.1–5.5 (though we will
add more in a bit).
Here is a very simple interpretation. Let our universe of discourse consist of the
lamp on my desk. When we say that all or some objects in the universe have a certain
property, we will just mean that the lamp has that property. The lamp will count as
a set, it will have no members, and its rank will be itself.
If we eliminate defined vocabulary and translate things into a kind of logicianese,
Axiom 5.1 reads as follows.
Every set x and every set y is such that [ρ(x) ⇒ ρ(y) if and only if some member z of y is
such that [every member w of x is such that [ρ(w) ⇒ ρ(z)]]].

If that looks like gibberish, a more formal version may be helpful.
∃x∃y((x is a set ≤ y is a set) ∧ (ρ(x) ⇒ ρ(y) ∀ ∞z ⇒ y∃w ⇒ x ρ(w) ⇒ ρ(z))).
According to the above interpretation, this says that my lamp is a member of my
lamp if and only if some member of my lamp has a certain property that we need not

