The Metaphysics of Causation

J. Dmitri Gallow

her plant) throughout some time interval. Alternatively, Hart and Honoré
propose that

about the state of a particular physical system or region of space at
or during a particular time or time-interval.

negative statements like “he did not pull the signal” are ways of
describing the world, just as affirmative statements are, but they
describe it by contrast not by comparison as affirmative statements
do. (1959 [1985: 38])

On this understanding, a variable’s actual value just corresponds to the
true proposition in the family. If we assume that facts are just true
propositions, we get a view on which the token causal relata are just facts
(of a particular kind).

For example, suppose that, instead of watering the plant, Anna took a
stroll. Then we could take “Anna’s failure to water her plant” to be a
contrastive way of describing Anna’s stroll; we could then allow that the
event of Anna’s stroll caused the plant to die.

In general, it seems that we can take any pre-existing view about token
causes and effects and translate it into a view about variable values. For
instance, take a Kimian view of events, on which, for any property F, any
individual a, and any time or time interval t, ⟨F, a, t⟩ is an event. Then, we
could have a view on which each value of a given variable corresponds to
one of these Kimian triples. What’s distinctive about variable values as
causal relata, then, isn’t the individual values, but rather, how they are
packaged together into a single variable. For instance, taking the Kimian
view as our point of departure, we could have a variable, call it who steals
the bike, whose potential values include ⟨steals the bike, Susan, t⟩ and
⟨steals the bike, Alex, t⟩. Or we could have a variable, call it what Susan
steals, whose potential values include ⟨steals the bike, Susan, t⟩ and ⟨steals
the canoe, Susan, t⟩. And there’s a third variable, call it what Susan does to
the bike, whose potential values include ⟨steals the bike, Susan, t⟩ and
⟨buys the bike, Susan, t⟩. Now, there’s an additional metaphysical question
faced by those who think that the token causal relata are variable values—
a question not faced by Kim—which is: are the variable values who steals
the bike = ⟨steals the bike, Susan, t⟩, what Susan steals = ⟨steals the bike,
Susan, t⟩, and what Susan does to the bike = ⟨steals the bike, Susan, t⟩ all
the same causal relatum, or are they different? (For more on these kinds of
questions, see §3.1 below.)

1.1.3 Variable Values
In contrast to the extensive literature on events and facts, there has been
comparatively less discussion of the metaphysics of variables and variable
values. When the issue is discussed, many find it congenial to reduce
variable values in some way or other to one of the other kinds of entities
which have been proposed as token causal relata. In many applications,
binary variables (variables which take on two potential values, usually 0
and 1) are used for whether a certain event occurs. Then, questions about
what it takes for the variable to take on a value can be translated into
questions about what it takes for the relevant event to occur. Hitchcock
(2012) suggests that the values of variables be taken to be Lewsian event
alterations. (For Lewis [2000], an alteration of an event, e, is a modally
fragile event—an event which would not occur, were it ever-so-slightly
different—which is not too different from e itself. Some alterations of e
will be ways for e to occur, and some will be ways for e to fail to occur,
but they are all alterations of e.) An unabridged draft of Hall (2007, see
reference for link) proposes that a variable is a family of pairwise
incompatible propositions, where each proposition is

8

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Here is an argument (adapted from Dretske 1977) that the variable values
what Susan steals = ⟨steals the bike, Susan, t⟩ and what Susan does to the

Fall 2022 Edition

9

