Philosophical Review

MATTHEW WEINER

tion is having seen and heard dogs bark or having been told by a trustworthy informant that dogs bark, and either of these warrants is
sufficient for knowledge. If the speaker’s situation is so unusual that
she has some other warrant for believing that dogs bark, she should say
so. Similarly for sentences such as “It’s raining” or “Albert won the batting title last year”; someone who asserts these while disclaiming knowledge is admitting that she does not have the most likely and most
satisfactory warrant for the truth of her assertion.
Predictions and retrodictions are generally acceptable in the
absence of knowledge precisely because the most likely and satisfactory
warrant for believing in their truth is not sufficient for knowledge.21
Indeed, predictions and retrodictions can be maintained while knowledge is explicitly disclaimed. Suppose that after Aubrey asserts (3),
Pullings asks, “How do you know that the French will attack at nightfall?” and Aubrey responds,
(13) I don’t know they’ll attack at nightfall—we haven’t intercepted their orders—but my prediction is that they will.
Here Aubrey is still asserting that the French will attack at nightfall; for
he explicitly describes it as a prediction, which (recall from section 1)
is a kind of assertion. (See section 4 for more on why it is important to
count predictions as assertions.) Nor does (13) sound paradoxical.22
Hence, even if the bald Moorean formulation “p but I don’t know that
p” sounds odd, it is possible to conjoin an assertion with a denial of
knowledge.23
The truth account, together with Gricean mechanisms, thus can
explain the data that motivated the knowledge account. For our assertions to be proper, not only must they be true, we must have reason to
believe them true. The hearer thus is entitled to conclude that the
speaker has some warrant for her assertion. In many cases, the most
likely warrant combined with truth will be enough for knowledge.
When it is obvious that the speaker’s warrant would not be enough for
knowledge, assertion without knowledge is permissible.
4. Possible Defenses of the Knowledge Account
I have argued that the truth account can explain the data that the
knowledge account explains; we should consider whether the knowledge account can accommodate the data that the truth account
explains. There are three nonexclusive ways to fit cases such as (3) and
(4) to the knowledge account. One is to say that the utterances in ques238

Published by Duke University Press

