Philosophical Review

MUST WE KNOW WHAT WE SAY?
12 In some sense, it may be inappropriate for Pullings to feel resentment in

any case because a lieutenant is not entitled to resent his captain. Abstracting
from such considerations, we are concerned with whether Pullings qua
epistemic being is entitled to feel resentment.
13 More precisely, asserting (1) is pointless if (5b) is true and (5a) and (5c)
are mutually known to Alice and Sarah, but in the cases in question this
mutual knowledge is present.
14 Indeed, they are mutually known; see note 13 above.
15 What if Sarah had evidence that Alice’s ticket was even less likely to have
won than Alice thought? This would not strengthen Alice’s belief that her
ticket was almost certain not to have won. Rather it would give her grounds for
a belief with a different content, “My ticket is even less likely to have won than
I thought before.” Hence this scenario would not falsify (7b).
16 Alternatively, Alice may conclude that Sarah does not mean her denial of
inside information to be taken seriously. (This might be akin to “You didn’t
hear this from me, but your ticket didn’t win.”) Then the implicature is not
canceled because the assertion that would cancel the implicature is itself not
meant to be believed. The implicature that Sarah has inside information is still
generated by Gricean principles in this case; Alice reconciles Sarah’s utterance
with the Cooperative Principle by concluding that “I do not have inside information” is not to be believed, so that Sarah’s utterance does have some point.
17 Note that Sarah must give some explanation after saying “Your ticket
didn’t win”; otherwise her assertion will seem obviously false.
18 An anonymous referee suggests that a parallel argument would entitle
Alice to conclude that Sarah has a probabilistic warrant. Sarah did not assert
(6*):
(6*) Your ticket is absolutely certain not to have won,
which would entail that the speaker has nonprobabilistic warrant. So, the suggestion goes, if asserting (1) instead of (6) implicates that Sarah has nonprobabilistic warrant for her assertion, asserting (1) rather than (6*) implicates
that Sarah lacks nonprobabilistic warrant for her assertion. Both implicatures
cannot hold, so if the argument is truly parallel, asserting (1) does not implicate nonprobabilistic warrant.
I do not think that the argument is truly parallel. Though (6*) entails that
Sarah has nonprobabilistic warrant, (6*) cannot be felicitously asserted in
every case in which she has nonprobabilistic warrant. If Sarah has merely
heard from a usually reliable source that Alice’s ticket did not win, she cannot
assert (6*) because she is not absolutely certain that the ticket did not win. So in
asserting (1) rather than (6*), Sarah does not implicate that she has probabilistic warrant rather than a nonprobabilistic warrant that falls short of absolute
certainty. (I thank the referee for making me see that “if and only if” rather
than “only if” was required in the text.)
19 It is necessary for Sarah to make the nonprobabilistic grounds explicit
because she could have nonprobabilistic grounds for her assertion; she might
have known that Alice’s solution was flawed.
20 Again, I am for the moment relying on the intuitive judgment that

249

Published by Duke University Press

