204

B. Chen

Kant [was] [...] therefore agnostic about the literal truth of any functional ascription [...] the
agnosticism has its source in the assumption that a process cannot properly be characterized
as purposive if it can be explained on the basis of physico-chemical laws and that an effect
of an organic process can count as one of its biological functions only if that process was
intended or designed to produce the stated effect. Agnosticism concerning the truth of function ascriptions seems to be the price that must be paid for explicating the notion of biological
function in terms of conscious intent. But if the notion of being a function can be explicated,
as I believe it can be, with no reference to intentions or choices of conscious organisms, the
validity of ascribing a function to an entity can be decided by empirical inquiry, without any
need for the elaborate made-believe that seems to be an inseparable accompaniment of the
heuristic view. (Nagel, 1977/1979, p. 305)

Nagel’s solution to this puzzle was to refer to non-intentional accounts of teleology. According to Nagel, Kant would not be puzzled, if he ever understood that
teleological terms are also open to non-intentional accounts. However, as can be
anticipated, Kant would not be impressed by Nagel’s solution, exactly by referring
to Nagel’s eliminativism. Kant would question Nagel: if teleological terms are eliminable in principle, why not just eliminate them rather than embrace non-intentional
accounts?
For hard-core mechanists (admittedly one side of Nagel who treated teleological
terms as anthropomorphic vestiges), the persistence of teleology in biology might
only attest to subjective projections of mind onto life. More tough-minded thinkers
might even sneer that some biologists and philosophers have confused minds and
cannot think with precise concepts. This might be correct in some cases. Yet, Kant
would want to suggest a different and perhaps a more objective reason, in relation to
the simple fact that biology claims to be the science of life. For Kant, the persistence of
teleology in biology possesses a deeper implication that alludes to an important part
of empirical reality, that is, the reality of life itself (I mean, the pure phenomenon
of life).12 This is indeed Kant’s view, as he ascribed an identificatory function to
teleology (Quarfood, 2006; Van den Berg, 2015, p. 111).
My term to illustrate the implication is “quasi-intentional”. Again, hard-core
mechanists might dismiss the anthropomorphic implication of biological teleology
as sheer nonsense. For them, teleological terms in biological discourse might be
acceptable, but these terms must receive non-intentional accounts and become therefore eliminable. There is nothing wrong with this judgment; however, it is doubtful
whether this judgment does full justice to the almost inevitable anthropomorphic
tendency developed in biological discourse. While it is a truism that only mechanism contributes to scientific biology, intentional accounts remains attractive, as sheer
mechanism appears unable to capture certain aspect of living organisms. Nevertheless, the intentional sense of teleology fails to play a genuine role in biology, and
almost all biologists abhor intentional teleology. Then, what is the missing aspect of
organisms, which can be neither mechanistic, non-intentional teleology, nor human,
intentional teleology? My view here, in agreement with Kant, is that the missing
12 Here it is important to distinguish objects predicatable of life (extension) and life itself (intension).

What we general call biological knowledge is only knowledge about the former, rather than the
latter (Ben-Naim, ms). Indeed, it is safe to say that we possess no genuine knowledge about life
itself, even though we recognize so many things as alive in the world.

