52

S. Verhaegh

year in Europe since German philosophers outside the Berlin Group appeared to be
unanimously opposed to his naturalism:
With few exceptions, German philosophers constitute one great idealist family. [...] It is
something taken for granted. [...] In a discussion of the implications of a doctrine, when
the professor exclaims, ‘Aber, meine Herren, das ist Naturalismus,’ he means his hearers
to understand that the position has been reduced to absurdity. Naturalism means Locke and
an empty mind or John Stuart Mill and the possibility that 2 + 2 = 5. [...] William James
seems to be the only American philosopher who is known—and he is more often ‘refuted’
than read. (Hook, 1930, pp. 144–146)

Reichenbach, however, was an important exception. Not only had he, in developing a “naturalistic interpretation of the a priori” proven to be a philosophical ally
to the American naturalists (Hook, 1930, pp. 159–160), he was also a kindred spirit
in ideological terms. In his “Memories of Hans Reichenbach”, Hook remembers:
I [found] Reichenbach’s philosophy congenial to my own pragmatic naturalism. [...] We
became even friendlier when Reichenbach discovered that I had strong socialist views. He
had never met an American socialist before and seemed as surprised to learn that there were
American socialists as some proto-Nazi students at Munich had been when I told them that
there was a Jewish proletariat in the United States. (Hook, 1978, pp. 33–34)

Hook appears to have described the views of Reichenbach and his group in several
letters to Nagel, who immediately started reading up on his work.18 It is probably also
via Hook that Nagel learned about the views of Rudolf Carnap, who rapidly started
to become more influential among European philosophers after the publication of
Der Logische Aufbau der Welt (1928). In his “Personal Impression of Contemporary
German Philosophy”, Hook briefly mentions the work of Carnap—one of the latter’s
first mentions in the American literature—but describes him as less naturalistic than
Reichenbach, likely because he knew that the Vienna Circle, at the time, disagreed
with the latter’s views about the aims of scientific philosophy.19
Nagel, too, was critical of Carnap’s work in the early 1930s. He was especially
opposed to (what he perceived to be) some of Carnap’s central theses in the Aufbau. In
“Verifiability, Truth, and Verification” (1934a), Nagel critically examines Carnap’s
translational reductionism, the view that “the meaning of a proposition is to be
obtained by translating it into others until only such appear whose meaning may be
directly apprehended in sense” (Nagel, 1934a, p. 146). Nagel’s main problem with
this thesis is that it is incompatible with his aforementioned holistic perspective on
theory testing (see Sect. 3.2). Since any verifying process has “value only within a
framework of pre-existing knowledge” (Nagel, 1934a, p. 143, original emphasis),
18 Unfortunately, Hook’s letters to Nagel from the late 1920s are lost. Nagel’s responses to Hook,

however, reveal that the former started reading Philosophie der Raum-Zeit Lehre in the fall 1928,
shortly after Hook had arrived in Germany (Nagel to Hook, September 4, 1928, SHP). Hook
must also have told Reichenbach about Nagel’s work. For a few months later, Nagel writes that
Reichenbach sent him a reprint of “Ziele und Wege der physikalischen Erkenntnis” (Reichenbach
1929). See Nagel to Hook (July 23, 1929, SHP).
19 For a reconstruction of the theoretical tensions between the Berlin Group and the Vienna Circle
in the early 1930s, see Milkov (2013), Dewulf (2020, Sect. 2), and Verhaegh (2020c).

