Philosophy of Science

247

The superstar firm model consists of a system of equations, some of which are
shown here:
 


q pω  pσ
(1)
ω d Apω
  
  
(2)
q pω  pω  cω q0 pω  0
 
ε pω  Apω d0 Apω =dApω   σ
(3)
pω
cω

(4)

wV
pω qω

(5)

mω ≡
Sω ≡

We can interpret these equations by assigning economic meaning to the
mathematical variables and parameters: q(pω), for example, refers to the quantity
demanded for an individual good ω, pω refers to the price of such a good, σ is a
preference parameter, ε(pω) is the so-called elasticity of demand, mω are what
economists call firm markups, and cω are marginal costs. Thus interpreted, these
equations basically tell you about the demand side (equation one), the supply side
(equations two and three), the markups (equation 4), and the labor share (equation 5)
in the model economy.
In practice, the economists not only interpret the model by assigning meaning in
this way. They tell us much more about the model by offering further verbal
descriptions that outline other features of the model in economic terms. For example,
they tell us that “in the model, entrepreneurs entering an industry are ex ante
uncertain of their productivity zi. They pay a sunk entry cost κ and draw zi from a
known productivity distribution with density function λ(z). Firms that draw a larger
value of z will employ more inputs and have a higher market share” (Autor et al. 2020,
654). While this verbal description tells us more about the model, importantly, this is
not where I want to suggest that we find the narrative.11 To appreciate the role that
the narrative plays in this case study, we need to pay attention to the fact that the
economists not only posit the model or describe the modifications they have made to
its predecessor(s). They further engage with it.12
One thing that the economists of the case study do with the model is that they
manipulate it to mathematically derive results. These results are presented in terms
of three major “propositions” (Autor et al. 2020, Appendix) establishing relationships
between key variables considered in the model. The first result establishes a
relationship between two variables, the size of a firm and the size of its labor share,
11
Commonly, interpreting a model means assigning a unique meaning to the primitive nonlogical
symbols (such as variables and parameters) that turns a mathematical structure into a scientific model
(see, e.g., Frigg 2023 for different versions of this). In that case, such verbal descriptions are not part of an
interpretation. On less orthodox notions of interpretation, one might treat such informal elucidations as
“interpreting” a model. Crucially, however, I suggest that the narratives (at least those I focus on in this
article) are not primarily tasked with informally describing a model in this way, but they emerge in a
further engagement with the model as discussed in this section.
12
Locating narratives in this further engagement follows Morgan (2012) who sees narratives as
emerging in the processes of model manipulation (see also Wise 2011, 2017).

https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2024.64 Published online by Cambridge University Press

