296

Neopragmatism

of particular aspects of the use of language. As such, they are read off from the
various collective practices which constitute linguistic behavior; they do not
govern those practices qua collective.

Here Lovibond is addressing the normative status of linguistic rules. At first glance,
one thinks of the rule as wielding the power to guide behavior. Rules are prescriptive: normative constraints flow from them. Rules dictate the standards against
which linguistic correctness is measured. But if, as Lovibond suggests, linguistic
rules are “abstract representations of what is actually done by speakers,” the appar­
ent prescriptive power of the rules vanishes: the prescriptive work is done not by
the rule itself, but by some more basic imperative that prescribes conformity to
communal uniformities (“Do as others do”). Thus construed, the linguistic rule is
itself normatively inert: the information it provides does not go beyond that pro­
vided by sociologists and astute observers of actual cultural uniformities.
Pragmatist skepticism about PO derives from precisely such considerations.
As an artworld case in point, consider Jerrold Levinson’s (1980) efforts to spe­
cify “what a musical work is.” Drawing upon various entrenched intuitions—­that
musical works are created rather than discovered, that cultural/historical contexts
are relevant to the individuation of compositions, and that means of performance
(e.g. choice of instrumentation) are integral to a work—­Levinson (1980: 6) con­
cludes that “a musical work is more than just a sound structure per se.” His solu­
tion to “the ontological question” is to regard musical works as “indicated types,”
which pack into their essential natures the very information that Levinson (and
many others) regard as vital in our interactions with musical works. Indicated
types, unlike types simpliciter, conveniently contain in their canonical designa­
tions parameters that reflect those factors judged vital.
But it is not clear how Levinson’s “ontology of musical works” adds anything—­
other than new notational devices—­to the information already implicit in the
individuative requirements sustained within the relevant community. The claim
that “Works produced by different composers are different works” is neither
explained nor illuminated by ascending to “ontological mode” and claiming that
works are partly constituted by historical etiology. The ontology is redundant: it
adds nothing to the (alleged) individuative data with which the inquiry began.
Redundancy itself is not damaging; often it is valuable to render underlying
uniformities explicit. A perspicuous grammar for a natural language, e.g., simply
articulates and systematizes what is already there; this echoes Lovibond’s point
above.15 The damage occurs—­according to the pragmatist—­in the illusion that
the ontology places normative constraints upon institutional practices. This is
precisely the illusion that Wittgenstein seeks to dispel concerning the meaning of

15 Thanks to Joshua Gert for suggesting the analogy.

