130

Neopragmatism

Cartwright’s view (in Cartwright 1979) is that general causal relations—­which
she calls causal laws—­provide the grounds for the effectiveness of the effective
strategies we may use to promote our ends. I propose to reverse the order of
explanation here, and theorize that the general causal relations are as they are in
virtue of which methods are the effective ones.
This leaves me in agreement with Cartwright that in any effective method
<M, K, E>, the kind of state of affairs that can be a value of M(x) must be among
the causes of the kind of state of affairs that can be a value of E(x), when the
background condition K(x) is in place—­at least in the kinds of cases that
Cartwright was interested in. There is an important exception, though: in some
cases, the means in an effective method helps to ground the end, rather than to
cause it. For example, consider the method <M(t), K(t), E(t)> where:
M(t) = the proposition that Bert believes at t that it is raining at t
K(t) = the proposition that it is not raining at t
E(t) = the proposition that Bert has a false belief about the weather at t
This is a clear case of an effective method. You can indeed get Bert to have a false
belief about the weather by means of getting him to think it’s raining when it’s
really not. But in a successful implementation of this method, the means does not
cause Bert to have a false belief about the weather—­it simply is Bert’s false belief
about the weather. In a case like this, M(x)&K(x) entails E(x), in the sense that
there is no (broadly) logically possible world in which M(x)&K(x) is true while
E(x) is not. One of the things that Hume got right about causation is that there
can be no such entailment of an effect by its cause. Causal connections are not
logical connections.13
So, here are three plausible principles relating general causation to ef­fect­ive­
ness of methods:
(5a) If M(x)&K(x) entails E(x) for some value of x, then M(x) is not a cause
of E(x) in conditions K(x).
(5b) If <M, K, E> is effective, and M(x)&K(x) does not entail E(x) for any
value of x, then M(x) is a cause of E(x) in conditions K(x).
(5c)

If M is a cause of E in conditions K, then <M, K, E> is effective.

We might call (5a) “Hume’s principle” and (5b) “Cartwright’s principle.” Here is
the rationale for (5c): suppose I do bring about a cause of my end, under condi­
tions in which that cause does indeed act as a cause, and suppose my end is then
realized—­
don’t I bear b-responsibility for the realization of my end, then?
13 I am grateful to Philip Pettit for discussion on this point.

