The Reflex Theory

69

second kind are the central topic of Pavlov’s research. Conditioned reflexes
are said to be learned through the creation of an association between an arbitrary stimulus (e.g., the ticking of a metronome at a par­tic­u­lar frequency) and
a stimulus that innately ­causes a reflexive response—­such as food, the stimulus for the unconditioned reflex of salivation. The ­cerebral cortex is said to
be the neural substrate of conditioned reflexes since ­these responses do not
persist ­after surgical removal of this structure. Pavlov posited no additional,
“higher” ­mental structures that exert control over reflexive be­hav­ior—­all
actions are said to be determined by ­these two kinds of reflexes.
This radical conclusion did find adherents, such as Hull and Baernstein
(1929, 14), who write, “It is believed by increasing numbers of students of
­human and other mammalian behaviour that the conditioned reflex, with
its power of substituting one stimulus for another, is the basic mechanism
not only of ordinary habits but of the entire ­mental life.”
The proposal of ­these authors is that the conditioned reflex should be replicable in human-­made device. Their idea was to build a reflex machine and
assess its capacities for learning and intelligence as a test of this generalized
theory of the mind. Still, the thesis that the reflex is the basis of “­mental life”
in its entirety was never endorsed by the British physiologist Charles Sherrington, who himself was a major contributor to the field. Sherrington’s own
way of characterizing the elementary status of the reflex was very influential: “The reflex-­arc is the unit mechanism of the ­nervous system when that
system is regarded in its integrative function. The unit reaction in ­nervous
integration is the reflex, ­because ­every reflex is an integrative reaction and no
­nervous action short of a reflex is a complete act of integration.” (1906a, 7).6
His view was that ­these fundamental units of activity, the reflexes, ­were
compounded together during the evolution and development of the ­nervous
system to generate the basis for more complex be­hav­ior. The motions of
r­unning, walking, and leaping are the outcome of reflexes concatenated
together.7
I have highlighted how proponents of the reflex theory took reflexes to
have an elementary status. Relatedly, Kurt Goldstein, a major critic of reflexology (see section 3.2), refers to its methodology as “atomistic.” To understand the claim that the reflex approach is atomistic, we must take the

6. See Casper (2014) for a useful overview of Sherrington’s ­career and the notion of
“integration.”
7. See Graham Brown (1914, 19–20) for discussion.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2345162/book_9780262378628.pdf by guest on 30 June 2025

