NEURALATEX: a machine learning
library written in pure LATEX

arXiv:2503.24187v1 [cs.LG] 31 Mar 2025

James A. D. Gardner, Will Rowan and William A. P. Smith
Department of Computer Science
University of York, UK

Abstract—In this paper, we introduce NEURALATEX,
which we believe to be the first deep learning library
written entirely in LATEX. As part of your LATEX document
you can specify the architecture of a neural network and its
loss functions, define how to generate or load training data,
and specify training hyperparameters and experiments.
When the document is compiled, the LATEX compiler will
generate or load training data, train the network, run
experiments, and generate figures. This paper generates a
random 100 point spiral dataset, trains a two layer MLP on
it, evaluates on a different random spiral dataset, produces
plots and tables of results. The paper took 48 hours to
compile and the entire source code for NEURALATEX is
contained within the source code of the paper.
We propose two new metrics: the Written In Latex
(WIL) metric measures the proportion of a machine
learning library that is written in pure LATEX, while
the Source Code Of Method in Source Code of Paper (SCOMISCOP) metric measures the proportion of
a paper’s implementation that is contained within the
paper source. We are state-of-the-art for both metrics,
outperforming the ResNet and Transformer papers, as
well as the PyTorch and Tensorflow libraries. Source code,
documentation, videos, crypto scams and an invitation
to invest in the commercialisation of NEURALATEX are
available at neuralatex.com.

I. I NTRODUCTION
While often used as a document preparation markup
language, in fact LATEX is itself a Turing-complete programming language. LATEX natively provides variables,
loops and conditionals via TEX primitives, while other
features such as object-orientation are supported via appropriate packages [8]. Yet, if you consult the curated list
of awesome machine learning frameworks, libraries and
software (by language) [5], LATEX is not even included
as a category of programming language. This motivated
us to write a deep learning library entirely in LATEX.
A. Wait, what?
When we talk about ‘compiling’ a LATEX document,
really what we mean is that the program written in your

\expanded{
\noexpand\pgfoonew\expandafter\noexpand
\csname #2\endcsname=
new Value(\newdata,{\selfid,\otherid
},*,0)
}

Fig. 1: A pure LATEX implementation has the benefit of
high code readability. For example, returning the result
of a product between two value objects only uses the
word ‘expand’ four times.

LATEX document is executed. The LATEX engine parses
and processes the document, resolving macros, executing
conditionals, and formatting content before outputting
the final result. NEURALATEX is a collection of .tex
LATEX source files that you can include in your document
via \input{...}. These provide a series of commands
that enable you to define a neural network, load or
generate training and evaluation data, train the network
via backprop and run inference on the trained network.
All of this happens when your document is ‘compiled’.
The results shown in Section IV are all dynamically
generated at compile time using a neural network that
was itself trained while the LATEX document compiled.
B. Why LATEX?
1) An ideal programming language: Do you sometimes find it hard to decide whether to expand, not
expand or expand after? Well, with LATEX you can
do all of those and more (see Figure 1). Who needs
variables when you have macros? Who needs arrays when you can create comma, separated, strings?
Who wants a simple for loop when you can have
pgfplotsforeachungrouped?
2) The self-contained paper: Machine learning is
facing a reproducibility crisis. Too often “code will
be made available upon paper acceptance” becomes a

