124

T. Polimenov

truths, Frege says that in so far as they are intuitable (anschaulich), even the wildest
phantasies in myths and fiction—phantasies that make “animals talk, … stones turn
into people, and people into trees”—are subject to the laws of geometry (Frege
1884/1950, § 14).
Since the topic of the sense and reference of a sign (singular term, predicate,
sentence, logical particle) provides the framework within which Frege discusses
fiction, let us describe the semantic categories ‘sense’ and ‘reference’ in the following general way: the sense of a sign is what we grasp when we understand the sign;
reference is what we mean by that sign. The sign expresses its sense and designates
its reference, by which the sense mediates the relation between the sign and its reference (the sense presents the reference in a certain way and from a certain perspective). Or in more detail: in expressing a sense, the sign designates the referent
determined by that sense. The following scheme can visualize this:

The one and the same reference can be presented by different senses (namely,
from different perspectives), and the one and the same sense can be expressed by
different signs.
In the context of the distinction between sense and reference the topic of fiction
is mentioned for the first time in a letter to Husserl from 24/05/1891 (Frege
1891/1980). Here Frege discusses the reference type of predicates (Begriffswörter)
and distinguishes it from the type of the references of singular terms (Eigennamen),
pointing out that whereas for the fictional use of language (den dichterischen
Gebrauch) it suffices that signs have senses, the scientific use requires their references as well.3
The first place where the topic of fiction is considered in more detail and where
it plays a key role in the course of the argumentation is SB. Here Frege (1892a/1984)
argues for two theses: (i) that proper names (and more generally: singular terms)
Following the traditional distinction between the content and the extension of a concept, Husserl
is inclined to think that what a general term (Gemeinname) refers to is a set of objects in a similar
way that a singular term refers to one definite object. Frege (1891/1980, 63) objects that a general
term—unlike an empty singular term—can have a scientific use even when no object falls under
the concept it denotes (when the respective set is empty). Let us take “a satellite of Venus” as an
example: the sentence “Venus has no satellites” (“There is no thing that is a satellite of Venus”)
does not only have a sense but also states a truth. We do not refer to sets by predicates (“… is a
satellite of Venus”) but by abstract singular terms: “the set of Venus’s satellites”. The reference of
a predicate is a function that maps objects (references of singular terms) to truth-values (references
of sentences). Frege calls that function “concept”. That is why the concept is not the sense but the
reference of a predicate. The sense is the perspective in which the concept is given. For example,
the predicates “… is red”, “… has the colour with the longest wave length” and “… has the colour
of blood” have different senses yet identical reference.
3

