210

conclusion

parts of that work elsewhere—​for example, in Ontology Made Easy,
where I addressed debates about what exists. There is a common goal of
those two books: the epistemological demystification of metaphysics.1
Otherwise put, in both works I hope to show that those questions of
metaphysics that are well-​formed and answerable can be answered
straightforwardly in ways that require nothing more mysterious
than conceptual and empirical work. I made that case for existence
questions in Ontology Made Easy, and I have made it for metaphysical modal questions here. Any metaphysical questions that remain,
beyond those that are implicitly existential or modal, will have to be
handled separately. Not everything can be done in a single book—​or
even two. But I hope that the work done here will at least give those
interested in other metaphysical problems some strategies to consider.
The goal in both cases is not the destruction of metaphysics, but
its demystification. Or rather, the goal is the demystification and—​
ultimately—​reorientation of metaphysics. For there is a still deeper
aim in my recent work: to give an account of what we legitimately can,
and should, do in metaphysics, in a way that avoids epistemological
mystery, and makes it clear how we can think of the work of metaphysics in a way that doesn’t make it look like a second-​rate rival to the
sciences in purporting to “discover” “deep and hidden” facts.
We can, first, examine how our concepts do work—​and what follows
from that, for other areas of our conceptual scheme, or given empirical
facts. This may also involve interesting rectification problems, such as
aiming to resolve puzzles or paradoxes our conceptual scheme seems
to give rise to, or assessing whether elements of our inherited conceptual scheme may be meshed with the conceptual scheme and empirical
results emerging from the natural sciences (in areas ranging from cognitive science to quantum physics).
As I have argued in Chapter 8, however, we can also go beyond
asking questions about how our conceptual scheme does work, to ask
what conceptual or linguistic scheme we ought to use. And that task is

1 In fact, the current volume and Ontology Made Easy were originally conceived of as
a single book directed toward developing a deflationary approach to (much of) metaphysics. As each side got longer, it became too long to contain a single volume, and split
into two works.

