440

Joe Roussos

mean for probabilism? More generally, do idealizations pose a threat to our normative inferences?
Important strategies for determining the impact of idealization on scientiﬁc models go under the headings ‘sensitivity analysis’ and ‘robustness analysis’. The former
typically refers to varying some numerical parameters in a model and studying the
changes in the results, while the latter typically refers to comparing the results of differently idealized models. One particular worry for idealizing assumptions is the possibility of ‘knife edge’ results—highly unstable results generated by the nature of the
idealization assumptions (for example, when they introduce a symmetry). Here, small
variations lead to very large changes of output, undermining the value of the model as
a tool for studying a real system, which is non-ideal. I will examine how we might deploy these strategies in philosophy.
The ﬁrst strategy for securing our normative conclusions is de-idealization. Suppose
we are interested in some conclusion from a highly descriptively idealized model. We
construct a new model with the same normative assumptions but fewer/less extreme
descriptive idealizations, and see whether the conclusion of interest emerges. Such a
model will typically be harder to build, and harder to use—idealizations, remember,
simplify analysis. But suppose that it is done, and that the conclusion re-emerges:
this lends some support to the claim that it has normative force. We could build up
this support inductively by considering successively less idealized models. This is a
relatively simple sounding strategy, but I am pessimistic about its success: in science
de-idealization is often very difﬁcult or impossible.14
More often we will have to put up with our idealizations. Scientiﬁc models work
well, often because of idealizations, but their use involves an acknowledgement of
their limitations and fallibility. Their value is in allowing the modeller to capture
the main features of a system’s behaviour, driven by the most important underlying
factors. In complex systems this is remarkable, but it comes at a cost. Sometimes that
cost is precision: the model captures a general pattern, but cannot make precise predictions. Sometimes, it is generality: the model works well in this particular case, but
not outside of it. Scientists determine these restrictions by considering the nature of
their idealizations. Philosophers, too, ought to do so. This may result in regarding results as normative under certain conditions, or within a certain domain. The philosopher might conjecture that the norm holds more widely, but no more. This is in contrast
to current practice in which a particular mathematical argument might be presented as
establishing the norm of probabilism.
One option is to study the role of the descriptive idealization mathematically, and
thus bolster the argument that the result is normative outside of the domain of the
model. In simple cases, this looks like varying the value of a numerical parameter:

14 This process of de-idealization was proposed by McMullin ([1985]) as a way of neutralizing the chal-

lenge idealizations pose to realism in the philosophy of science. However, Morrison ([2005]) has argued
convincingly that this de-idealization is often impossible in modern physics.

