628

Aidan Lyon

discrepancy between W and the mean of W , which is, say, 1000. So the sum
that we need to examine is:

where ci is the actual mean of the random variable xi . If we can show that
W  1000 is normally distributed, then we can conclude that W is normally distributed because normal distributions are invariant under additions of a scalar.

3.2 Varying variances and probability densities
It remains to be shown that the xi  ci are identically and independently
distributed. For convenience, I’ll call the new random variables x0i . Let’s
first start with the identity of the distributions, which I’ll call pi . By definition,
their means exist and are all 0, but there is more to a distribution than its
mean. For example, there is its variance. Are the variances of each of the x0i all
identical? It seems plausible that in fact they are not. For example, the variance associated with the amount of salt is plausibly smaller than the variance
associated with the amount of flour. If the variances are not all identical, then
the CLT doesn’t apply, and the explanation doesn’t go through. Moreover,
for all we know, it’s possible that some of the pi have different functional
forms. For example, the weight of flour used (minus 625 g) may be a normal
distribution, but the amount of water lost during the baking process (minus its
actual mean) might be a symmetric bimodal distribution, with probability
mass heaped over 1 and almost entirely absent over 0.
Fortunately, there is a more complicated version of the CLT that relaxes the
condition that the distributions be of the same form (or have the same variance), so long as they satisfy what is called the Lindeberg condition.
Central Limit Theorem (Lindeberg–Feller): Let xi be mutually independent random variables with distributions pi such that Eðxi Þ ¼ 0 and
Varðxi Þ ¼ i2 . Define s2n ¼ 12 +    + n2 . Then, if

ðLindeberg conditionÞ For every t > 0,

X
pﬃﬃﬃﬃ n
sn
k¼1

Z

y2 pi fdyg ! 0
jyjtsn

then the distribution of Sn ¼ ðx1 +    + xn Þ=sn tends to the normal
distribution with mean of 0 and variance of 1 (Feller [1971], p. 262).

The Lindeberg condition is complicated, but it entails a simpler condition
that is easier to understand and is still informative: it guarantees that the individual variances are small compared with their sum (Feller [1971], pp. 262–3).
Are the variances small with respect to their sum? It seems that they need
not be. For example, the variance associated with the weight of flour might be
quite large compared with the sum of the variances. One way for this to

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjps/article-abstract/65/3/621/1497281 by Universiteit van Amsterdam user on 06 May 2019

ðW  1, 000Þ ¼ ðx1  625Þ + ðx2  375Þ +    + ðxn  cn Þ

