Function of Modal Discourse

73

Thinking of the semantic rules as analogous to rules of games might
lead us to further objections, however. For games are typically thought
to be governed by constitutive rules—​rules that must be in force if that
very game is to be played at all.27 Analogously, the idea that our terms
are governed by semantic rules might be thought to commit us to the
idea that these are constitutive semantic rules—​rules that must be in
force if that very term is to be used at all.28 This seems to commit us to
the idea that when we change the semantic rules, we are no longer using
the same term at all—​and this might be thought to make it impossible
for speakers to communicate, or to undermine possibilities of genuine
disagreement. I have addressed the concern about barriers to communication elsewhere (2014), and the work of David Plunkett and Tim
Sundell (2013) gives a fine basis for replying to worries that speakers
who used terms with different meanings couldn’t be thought to genuinely disagree. But while I do not think these are genuine problems for
the constitutive rule view, I also do not mean to commit myself to the
idea that the semantic rules are “constitutive” in the above sense.
Even in the case of games, it is controversial whether or not the rules
should be thought of as constitutive. Mark Lance and John O’Leary-​
Hawthorne challenge the idea that games have constitutive rules.
Citing the changes in the rules of the National Basketball Association
that were introduced in response to the unexpected skills of Wilt
Chamberlain, they write that if we held that there is a fixed set of rules
definitive of a game, “then it would seem we must conclude that a different game was being played post-​Wilt from the one played pre-​Wilt”
(1997, 191). Yet that would be an unreasonable conclusion, they suggest, which would require us to say “that every record book is mistaken
since they all take statistics before and after Wilt to have been set in the
same game” and that those who talk about basketball would be subject
to an ambiguity of which they are unaware (1997, 191). In the case of
chess, which underwent a phase in which the rules were changed every
27 Talk of games having “constitutive rules” was popularized by Searle (1995), but the
way of characterizing constitutive rules here is mine.
28 I made use of this idea myself in some earlier work on the topic. But I have now
dropped the term “constitutive” and changed my views on this, for reasons I aim to make
clear here.

