Normative Formal Epistemology as Modelling

425

involves. Here are two examples. Earman’s A1 states that there is a probability value
for every sentence in the set A. Thus, the agent has an attitude to every proposition and,
as these are represented by numbers, they are commensurable. We can compare the
agent’s attitudes to any two propositions precisely and quantitatively: we can say how
much more conﬁdent they are in one than the other. This quantitative comparability
is critical for many decision theoretic applications of this framework. But, to some,
the completeness and ﬁne-grainedness of this comparability are neither normative
nor true. How should we regard the fact that the mathematics seems to ‘say’ that
agents have complete and continuous credences, when in fact they don’t?
Earman’s A2, P2, and P4 are part of the infamous ‘logical omniscience’ of Bayesian agents. They say that agents (ought to) assign the maximum degree of belief to
any sentence expressing a logical truth, that the same degrees of belief are assigned
to logically equivalent sentences, and that degree of belief is monotonic over entailment.
Agents who were really like this would have quite unusual beliefs! They would believe
fully every truth of mathematics, and equally in even opaque and complex but equivalent sentences, and their degrees of belief would track logical entailments—all of which
is, clearly, far beyond us. Again, what should we make of this? Some argue that logical omniscience is a norm or ideal, of a sort (for example, Lemmon and Henderson
[1959]; for further discussion of how omniscience is regarded in epistemic logic, see
Yap [2014]). But again, others disagree. For this latter camp, there is an important
question of whether and when it matters that the framework has this false implication.
Below, I will argue that regarding NFE as modelling allows us to understand the nature of these claims, tells us why we do not need to worry about them, and gives us
a way to do so in a justiﬁed and systematic manner.

3. Normative Formal Epistemology as Modelling
In this section and the next I will show that the shoe ﬁts. I will relate some lessons from
the last ﬁve or six decades of philosophical study of scientiﬁc modelling, and then
show that NFE has the characteristics philosophers have identiﬁed for models. This
establishes the possibility and hopefully plausibility of interpreting NFE as modelling.
I will then turn to arguing that we ought to do so.
A preliminary note: ‘Model’ is used to mean many different things. I do not intend
to use the meaning logicians give to the term, which is roughly an assignment of semantic values to a basic vocabulary, such that a speciﬁc set of sentences is rendered
true. The way I use the term ‘model’ is broadly consistent with a philosophy of science tradition that includes Cartwright ([1983], [1989]), Morgan and Morrison ([1999]),
and the many others cited below. If you typically think of models as set-theoretic structures you will need to take this section as stipulating a new meaning for that term.4
4 As Williamson ([2017]) points out, some models (in roughly my sense) in formal epistemology are also

logic models, so my sense of model is wider than the logical sense. I am thus not denying that logic models play a role, they simply aren’t my focus.

