The paradigm of first-order logic

and in particular his own
Lowenheim-Skolem

substitutional

theorem.

Quine

231

definition of logical truth, and the

(1970)

remarks

that

there

is another

definition of logical truth than the substitutional definition, namely the modeltheoretic definition: a given statement (or more precisely, a statement-schema) is
valid if it is satisfied by all models. But models are sets, or sequences of sets. Now,

not every statement determines a set. There are some statements, such as the
statement expressing Russell’s paradox (the set of all sets that are not members of
themselves is a member of itself):
x EX =—(x € x) (where ‘x’ is the mentioned set)

which determine no set. And there are some sets, such as the one that gives rise to
Grelling’s paradox — the set of all the object-language statements which do not
satisfy themselves — which are determined by no statement.*? From the
Lowenheim-—Skolem

theorem,

however,

two

other

theorems

can

be drawn,

which show the equivalence of the substitutional definition of logical truth and of
the model-theoretic definition, provided that the object-language is rich enough
to express the arithmetic of natural whole numbers:
(1) if aschemais true for all the substitutions of statements of elementary
arithmetic, then it is satisfied by every model;
(II) if a schema is satisfied by every model, then it is true for every

substitution of a statement.”
In other terms, as Quine shows, a schema is provable if and only if it is valid
(true under all its interpretations) if and only if every substitutional instance of
this schema in a language that is rich enough is true. The equivalence of validity
and provability is warranted by the completeness theorem. This result holds only
for first-order logic. Therefore this logic is characterised by a close link between,
on the one hand, the Lowenheim-Skolem theorem and the completeness
theorem, and on the other hand, by the correspondence between the substitutional and the model-theoretic definitions of logical truth. Thus there is a
‘remarkable’ coincidence between the definition of logical truth and the restriction
of this definition to first-order logic.
It follows that the conjunction of completeness and of the Lowenheim-Skolem
property allows us to limit the arbitrariness of the substitutional definition of

logic. As we have seen above, this definition is not sufficient to demarcate the
class of logical constants, since we can apply the substitutional definition to any
kind of constant. But the constants of first-order logic alone reveal such a strong
correspondence between the substitutional and the model-theoretic definitions.

Therefore, Quine concludes, we have a strong argument to restrict the application
of the substitutional definition. Correlatively, this justifies a maxim about logical
more
form, which Quine calls ‘the maxim of minimum mutilation’: do not exhibit

logical form than is needed to justify the validity of inferences: ‘Where it doesn’t

.24As we have seen above, several different logical forms may
itch, don’t scratch’
form that
represent one single inference as valid, but we should always choose the

