638

Aidan Lyon
may have only a couple of alleles. The normality then comes, when the
number of loci is large, from the Central Limit Theorem. (Gillespie [1998],
p. 106, my emphasis)

10

11

They originate from, or at least are inspired by, Francis Galton’s work in this area. See Stigler
([1986], Sections 2–3) for a historical account of the development of such explanations.
Interestingly, the size distribution of featured Wikipedia articles (in bytes) is very
well-approximated by a log-normal distribution (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Dr_pda/
Featured_article_statistics). A standard CLT explanation of this distribution might be that there
are many factors that determine the size of a featured article—say the contributions of different
authors—and these factors are independent and multiply together to form the total size of each
article. Of course, this is not true; at best, they might sum together. To run a CLT-style explanation for the distribution of featured article size one would have to find some set of factors that
are appropriately distributed and multiply to the total byte size of the article (or something that
could be transformed to total byte size without destroying approximate log-normality). It’s not
at all clear what those factors would be.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjps/article-abstract/65/3/621/1497281 by Universiteit van Amsterdam user on 06 May 2019

There are several reasons to be skeptical of such explanations.10 (I’ll focus on
Grinstead and Snell’s version since it’s more precise and uses a more general
version of the CLT.)
First, there is a problem with the construction of random variables whose
values are each ‘allele pair’s effect on the height of the individual’. Consider an
analogy with the lengths of Wikipedia articles. For some authors, it is possible
to isolate their contribution to the article (for example, five lines of text).
However, the contributions of others cannot be isolated in this way. One
author may write one line with completely false information. This causes another author to delete that one line, and replace it with three more. If the first
author hadn’t written the false information, the second wouldn’t have added
the three lines. Because of this, we can’t associate random variables with each
author’s contribution that all have the same units and sum to the total length
of the article. Genes can work in similar ways to determine a phenotype such
as height, and so for the same reason, we can’t associate random variables
with each allele pair’s effect on height that are all measured in the same way
and sum to total height.11
The second problem is closely related to the first, but still distinct. Genes can
regulate each other’s expression through gene regulatory networks. They also
interact through the developmental mechanisms that convert gene products
into the components of a trait (for example, muscle tissue). This means that a
gene’s contribution to height can be strongly dependent on the expression of
other genes. However, independence of factors is required for the CLT to apply.
Indeed, it’s striking that there is no mention of the condition of independence in
the above passage (or its surrounding text), even though the version of the CLT
that the authors cite (Theorem 9.5) requires it. There are generalizations of the
CLT that allow for some dependencies between factors, so long as other constraints are met (for example, Hoeffding and Robbins [1948]). However, it is by
no means clear that genetic factors satisfy these constraints.

