THE REASONER 19(2) 2005

http://doi.org/10.54103/1757-0522/2025/2

might say “If Jones eats all this ice cream, she will get sick.” This
conditional presupposes some sort of causal connection between
eating the ice cream and getting sick. Eating the ice cream will
make Jones sick. By contrast, the material conditional does not
have this implication. The material conditional is a mere truth
function. “If I eat this ice cream, then the sun is 93 million miles
from the earth,” while a false statement of causal connection, can
be a perfectly good truth-functional material conditional.
Returning to Semmelweis’s comments, there is reason to think
that he is thinking in terms of causal relations among things in
the world. He mentions the epidemic influences causing the horrible ravages of childbed fever and atmospheric-cosmic-terrestrial
changes generating childbed fever. In other words, Semmelweis
is reasoning about what one might loosely call the physical consequences of atmospheric-cosmic-terrestrial changes, namely, that
those changes would affect both hospital wards equally. But, upon
observation, one finds that those physical consequences do not obtain. The material conditional of symbolic logic is not meant to
capture the putative causal connections between the atmosphericcosmic-terrestrial changes and childbed fever.
A further hint regarding Semmelweis’s thinking comes a few sentences later, when he claims that “epidemic influences cannot explain the differences in mortality” (Semmelweis, 1983, p. 66).
This comment suggests the familiar thought that explanatory considerations have confirmation theoretic import. The thought is that
the physical consequences of things in the world being as hypothesis H depicts them lead to things in the world being as E depicts them, but independent determinations reveal that things in
the world are not as E depicts them. In other words, when scientists “deduce a testable proposition o”—as Bird would put it—
what they are doing is determining the physical consequences of
29

