chap 2

17/7/03

11:09 am

Page 26

Death of the Old Regime?

summon up so much resolution a second time as to execute their
purpose. So great is our horror of death that when it presents itself
under any form besides that to which a man has endeavoured to reconcile his imagination, it acquires new terrors and overcomes his
feeble courage. But when the menaces of superstition are joined to
this natural timidity, no wonder it quite deprives men of all power
over their lives, since even many pleasures and enjoyments, to which
we are carried by a strong propensity, are torn from us by this inhuman tyrant. Let us here endeavour to restore men to their native
liberty by examining all the common arguments against Suicide,
and showing that that action may be free from every imputation
of guilt or blame, according to the sentiments of all the ancient
philosophers.
5
If suicide be criminal, it must be a transgression of our duty either
to God, our neighbour, or ourselves.
6
To prove that suicide is no transgression of our duty to God, the
following considerations may perhaps sufﬁce. In order to govern the
material world, the almighty Creator has established general and
immutable laws, by which all bodies, from the greatest planet to the
smallest particle of matter, are maintained in their proper sphere and
function. To govern the animal world, he has endowed all living
creatures with bodily and mental powers; with senses, passions,
appetites, memory, and judgement, by which they are impelled or
regulated in that course of life to which they are destined. These two
distinct principles of the material and animal world, continually
encroach upon each other, and mutually retard or forward each
other’s operation. The powers of men and of all other animals are
restrained and directed by the nature and qualities of the surrounding bodies, and the modiﬁcations and actions of these bodies are
incessantly altered by the operation of all animals. Man is stopped
by rivers in his passage over the surface of the earth; and rivers, when
properly directed, lend their force to the motion of machines, which
serve to the use of man. But though the provinces of the material and
animal powers are not kept entirely separate, there results from
thence no discord or disorder in the creation; on the contrary, from
the mixture, union, and contrast of all the various powers of inanimate bodies and living creatures, arises that sympathy, harmony, and
proportion, which affords the surest argument of supreme wisdom.
7
The providence of the Deity appears not immediately in any operation, but governs everything by those general and immutable laws,
which have been established from the beginning of time. All events,
in one sense, may be pronounced the action of the Almighty. They all
26

