chap 2

17/7/03

11:09 am

Page 27

Faith and death in the late Enlightenment

proceed from those powers with which he has endowed his creatures. A house which falls by its own weight, is not brought to ruin
by his providence more than one destroyed by the hands of men; nor
are the human faculties less his workmanship than the laws of
motion and gravitation. When the passions play, when the judgement dictates, when the limbs obey, this is all the operation of God,
and upon these animate principles, as well as upon the inanimate,
has he established the government of the universe. Every event is
alike important in the eyes of that inﬁnite being, who takes in at one
glance the most distant regions of space and remotest periods of
time. There is no event, however important to us, which he has
exempted from the general laws that govern the universe, or which
he has peculiarly reserved for his own immediate action and operation. The revolution of states and empires depends upon the smallest caprice or passion of single men; and the lives of men are
shortened or extended by the smallest accident of air or diet, sunshine or tempest. Nature still continues her progress and operation;
and if general laws be ever broke by particular volitions of the Deity,
it is after a manner which entirely escapes human observation. As,
on the one hand, the elements and other inanimate parts of the creation carry on their action without regard to the particular interest
and situation of men, so men are entrusted to their own judgement
and discretion in the various shocks of matter, and may employ every
faculty with which they are endowed, in order to provide for their
ease, happiness, or preservation.
8
What is the meaning then of that principle that a man who, tired
of life and hunted by pain and misery, bravely overcomes all the natural terrors of death and makes his escape from this cruel scene; that
such a man I say, has incurred the indignation of his Creator by
encroaching on the ofﬁce of divine providence, and disturbing the
order of the universe? Shall we assert that the Almighty has reserved
to himself in any peculiar manner the disposal of the lives of men,
and has not submitted that event, in common with others, to the general laws by which the universe is governed? This is plainly false. The
lives of men depend upon the same laws as the lives of all other animals, and these are subjected to the general laws of matter and
motion. The fall of a tower, or the infusion of a poison, will destroy
a man equally with the meanest creature. An inundation sweeps
away every thing without distinction that comes within the reach of
its fury. Since therefore the lives of men are forever dependent on the
general laws of matter and motion, is a man’s disposing of his life
criminal, because in every case it is criminal to encroach upon these
27

