follow it.
In his 1968 essay “Rain and the Rhinoceros,” the American Trappist
monk Thomas Merton attempted to understand Eugene Ionesco’s play
Rhinoceros by comparing it to the rain. Trappist monks take vows of
silence. They almost never speak. In keeping with their silent life, they
live in a silent place. The sound of the rain on the tin roof of his iso¬
lated monastic cabin in the Kentucky woods must have given Merton
the only inspiration he needed to approach Ionesco’s rhinoceros. And
when the rain stopped, he heard the sound of the military airplane
overhead, leaving the nearby base, on its way to Vietnam. When the air¬
plane passed, he heard the hiss of his lantern burning. The rain pro¬
vided the window to the rhinoceros, and the rhinoceros the window to
the rain. The essay’s analysis balances the work of art, with the work of
nature, with the work of war. Merton understood critical thought as an
act of contemplation, not an act of production. At the same time, he
understood it to be, like all human activity, absurd. And thus he liberated
his critical mind to follow whatever might cross its path. As the zen say¬
ing goes, no matter where we go, we are never far from enlightenment.
How then can we understand the rain? We can understand it as a
scientist might, by studying climatic conditions and learning the Latin
names for clouds. Or we may understand the rain by looking at it and
how it falls—straight down, or at an angle, or lashed by the wind. Is it a
light drizzly rain, or is it only a mist and hardly rain at all? Is it the kind
that falls when the sun is shining just down the street? We could
understand rain by examining its effects—on plants, on people, on cities.
Or we may catalogue the sounds it makes on glass, on water, on stone,
on metal. We could even study the moods it evokes before it has
started and after it has stopped. We could not look at it directly, but
rather at what it reminds us of—childhood, violence, love, tears. Who
could tell us that any of these approaches to rain is not valid? And yet
we would be the first to admit their absurdity.
The modernists believed that each work of art somehow out¬
stretches interpretation, that each criticism reduces the infinite possi¬
bilities of the work, that no critique is exhaustive. I agree to the extent
that the opposite is also true—each artwork reduces its critique. Only
when criticism can step a little away from the artwork that fostered it
will it achieve a life of its own as a way of understanding. The way a

CRITICISM

intellects, our imaginations. We approach it with silence. We approach
it with childhood. We use pain or embarrassment. We use history. We
take a safe route or a dangerous one. We discover our approach and we

255

