But maybe future men Will find that peace, too, can be good and bad.
Perhaps peaceful men will drink out of boredom. Then perhaps drink
will become the great problem which seems to keep man from getting
all he thinks he should out of his abilities.
Clearly, peace is a great force, as is sobriety, as are material power,
communication, education, honesty, and the ideals of many dreamers.
We have more of these forces to control than did the ancients. And
maybe we are doing a little better than most of them could do. But
what we ought to be able to do seems gigantic compared with our con¬
fused accomplishments.
Why is this? Why can’t we conquer ourselves?
Because we find that even great forces and abilities do not seem to

RICHARD FEYNMAN

carry with them clear instructions on how to use them. As an example,

228

the great accumulation of understanding as to how the physical world
behaves only convinces one that this behavior seems to have a kind of
meaninglessness. The sciences do not directly teach good and bad.
Through all ages men have tried to fathom the meaning of life.
They have realized that if some direction or meaning could be given to
our actions, great human forces would be unleashed. So, very many an¬
swers must have been given to the question of the meaning of it all.
But they have been of all different sorts, and the proponents of one an¬
swer have looked with horror at the actions of the believers in another.
Horror, because from a disagreeing point of view all the great poten¬
tialities of the race were being channeled into a false and confining
blind alley. In fact, it is from the history of the enormous monstrosities
created by false belief that philosophers have realized the apparently
infinite and wondrous capacities of human beings. The dream is to
find the open channel.
What, then, is the meaning of it all? What can we say to dispel the
mystery of existence?
If we take everything into account, not only what the ancients
knew, but all of what we know today that they didn’t know, then I think
that we must frankly admit that we do not know.
But, in admitting this, we have probably found the open channel.
This is not a new idea; this is the idea of the age of reason. This is
the philosophy that guided the men who made the democracy that we
live under. The idea that no one really knew how to run a government
led to the idea that we should arrange a system by which new ideas
could be developed, tried out, tossed out, more new ideas brought in; a
trial and error system. This method was a result of the fact that science

