W hatever H appened to C arnapian D eflationism ?

Quantifier variance has come to be strongly associated with
Carnapian deflationism. Thus, for example, Matti Eklund writes:
. . . it is common to take Carnap to be what I will call an ontological pluralist: to hold a view not unlike that today defended
by Eli Hirsch (under the name quantifier variance) and Hilary
Putnam (under the name conceptual relativity). (Sometimes Hirsch
and Putnam are even described as ‘neo-Carnapians’).
(2009b, 137)

Kit Fine explicitly attributes quantifier variance to both Carnap
and Hirsch (2009, 164 n. 2). Ross Cameron labels Hirsch’s quantifier variance view ‘neo-Carnapianism’ (2008, 2), and Ted Sider
writes: “Carnap’s challenge to ontology is that there are many possible linguistic frameworks containing different rules of use for
the symbol ‘∃’” (2001, xxii). 20 The second feature, the association
between ontological deflationism and antirealism, has often been
encouraged by fans of hard metaphysics. Sider, for example, explicitly associates “Carnapian ontological relativity” with the claim
that “what there is . . . depends on human activity” (2001, 157). And
this association with antirealism has led many to reject deflationism, keeping it very much a minority position among metaphysicians until quite recently.21
But both of these features are separable from Carnapian deflationism: the first (quantifier variance) is a mistake to attribute

20. He does go on to note that different frameworks may, despite their variations, “agree
on a core inferential role” for the quantifier (2001, xxii), but clearly holds that the key
feature of the Carnapian view is accepting quantifier variance.
21. Although, anecdotally, there seems to be far more sympathy for some form of deflationism among philosophers at large than among metaphysicians. (This would not be
surprising, for it seems plausible that most people self-select as metaphysicians only if
they think the debates are interesting and substantive).

59

