since their “basic” powers ontologyM is not sufficiently informative on this rather domain-specific issue
(see section 4.1). Are obesity and race causes, according to the realist’s powers ontologyM? Do they have
“real” causal powers? It seems that either the realist has to admit that the powers ontologyM cannot
directly answer this type of domain-specific questions, or they need to deny that this is a fair question.
In my view, Carnapian pragmatism offers a more sensible way to make sense of this controversy.
Holland’s answer to “what can be a cause” is no longer so surprising if we notice that it is a direct
consequence of the causal framework he has accepted. He restricts the scope of causes to treatments
because the potential-outcomes framework he has adopted takes randomized experiments as the paradigm
of causal inference. In RCTs, the causes being considered are, by default, treatments. Now, Holland does
have good reasons to accept the potential-outcomes framework. First, randomized experiments have been
considered one of the most reliable methods of causal inference. Based on the idea of an RCT, the
potential-outcomes framework provides a conceptually clear and practically convenient definition of
causal effects. In particular, as Hernán and Taubman (2008) argue, if a variable cannot be conceived as a
treatment variable in a randomized experiment, its effects on other variables may be ill-defined. Besides,
the primary goal of the potential-outcomes framework is to inform public policy in medical and social
sciences. The framework is a suitable tool for achieving this goal. In view of all this, it starts to sound
reasonable that causes should be restricted to treatments.
Pearl has a quite different answer to “what can be a cause” given his acceptance of another causal
framework, namely, SCMs. Causes are not, and cannot, be restricted to treatments in this framework since
to represent the underlying causal structure or mechanism of a target system with a graphical model, we
often need to include various attributes as causes. The SCM framework is hence in sharp contrast to the
potential-outcomes framework in the sense that the latter takes the target system as a black box and only
cares about the effects of treatments on the system. But why does Pearl choose the SCM framework? An
important motivation is that Pearl’s causal inference framework wants to represent the causal structure of
a target system rather than just informing policymaking. This can be seen from Pearl’s (2018) distinction

27

