Carnapian who sets a much lower bar on when ontological commitments of a framework can be justified
and accepted.18
4. Ontology and methodology: Motivating the Carnapian approach
While I believe there are good reasons for favouring the Carnapian approach to causation over
metaphysical approaches, I must admit that I do not have knockdown or conclusive arguments against the
latter. This may be disappointing but is hardly surprising. As we have seen in the last two sections,
pragmatists and metaphysicians disagree on so many things (especially on the goals of ontological inquiry)
that probably any argument favouring one will rely on premises or intuitions that the other finds
unjustified.19 For this reason, the “arguments” I shall provide in this section are not aimed at settling the
debate or disagreement; instead, the goal is to stimulate further exchanges between pragmatists and
metaphysicians.
4.1 What is wrong with the metaphysical approach?
The Carnapian and the metaphysician have very different understandings of the relationship
between ontology and methodology. For metaphysicians, the study of ontologyM (i.e., metaphysics) is a
distinct project from that of methodology or epistemology: ontological issues are concerned with what

In a broadly Quinean spirit, Schurz and Gebharter (2016) argue that causation is a “theoretical concept” explicated
by “axioms” of the “theory” of causal Bayes nets (aka SCMs). My project and theirs share important common
grounds, but I disagree that the SCM framework alone is sufficient to explicate the concept (or rather concepts) of
causation. In making this claim, they seem to assume that SCMs can capture everything important about causation
and that it is the single best causal framework we have. There are good reasons to doubt these assumptions. First, the
framework of SCM is merely concerned with the “thin” concept of causation. But there are plenty of “thick” causal
concepts used in the sciences that the formalism simply cannot capture (cf. Cartwright, 2007). For example, in
classical mechanics, the detailed dynamics of a system’s evolution needs to be described using Hamiltonian
equations which we do not find in SCMs. Additionally, axioms of SCMs presuppose idealized assumptions (such as
modularity) that may be violated in biological sciences. Moreover, even in domains where SCMs plays a significant
role, causal notions used there are often richer and messier than what the axioms of SCMs can tell us. For example,
actual interventions conducted in clinical trials are much more complicated than the kind of atomic or ideal
interventions assumed in the SCM framework. Additionally, the formalism of SCM does not capture other
peripheral causal notions like invariance, proportionality, and stability, which play an indispensable role in causal
inference practice.
19
I am not the only one who is skeptical about the possibility of having conclusive arguments against the
metaphysician. Woodward (2017, p. 193), for example, found that “putting everything into an ordinary ‘linear’
argument [against the metaphysician] was impossible”; so, he organized his article as an imaginary dialogue with
“Professor Metafisico”.
18

18

