The Ontology of Phonology

217

A speaker’s knowledge of morphemes can thus be represented as
a list of items containing information about each morpheme stored
in memory.
What information?
Obviously information about its meaning, its functional structure, and the thematic roles it assigns. Also about its lexical category, i.e., whether it is a noun, verb, preposition, adjective, conjunction. And certainly information pertaining to how the morpheme
is pronounced, that is, phonological information. All this can be
thought of as encoded in a “complex symbol”, made up of elements
that stand for meaning, lexical category, etc. The markers pertaining to how the morpheme is pronounced are of particular interest
to us here. We will refer to them as the “identifying index.” The
vocabulary as a whole can be thus represented as a long list of such
complex symbols, each of which contains, among other things, an
identifying index.9
We now turn to the information in identifying indices.
Most morphemes take on the same phonetic form regardless of
syntactic and/or morphological contexts. Thus the verb hint shows
up in the phonetic form representable as [hInt] whenever uttered. So
that string of phonetic symbols is used as its identifying index.
Other morphemes assume different phonetic forms depending on
syntactic and/or morphological contexts. For instance, the stems sell
and shelf were pronounced differently in (1) than in the following
utterance:
(5)

The merchant sells a shelf.

The identifying index of such stems is also a string of phonetic
symbols, namely [s  l] and [ lf] in the two cases at hand. We will
come back to why those particular strings.
Some morphemes, notably the English plural and past tense affixes, not only assume different phonetic forms in different contexts,
but these forms can be utterly dissimilar, and sometimes they don’t
appear phonetically at all!
So note what happens to the plural affix in the following cases:
9
In talk about identifying indices, we must take care to distinguish between
what we presume to be “in the mind” of the knower and its representation in
the notation of our theory. We use the term “identifying index” to refer to the
representation in the notation of the theory, not what is “in the mind.”

