224

On What We Know We Don’t Know

with acoustic properties, don’t have that property. Noises made by
our coffee pot, or coughs for instance, don’t have it. That fact is of
the same order as the fact that swinging pendula have periods which
standing rocks don’t, that positive numbers have square roots, which
trees don’t, that the manuscript from which we are reading has a certain weight, which the ideas we are expressing don’t. Determinable
properties, by the way, like period, square root, weight, and so on,
are a kind of property presupposed by what-questions such as “What
is the period of ...?”, “What is the square root of ...?”, “What is the
weight of ...?” Objects that don’t have the property hold no answer
to the corresponding question.
(1), (5), (13), and other tokens are, of course, open to many
questions besides the ones answered in derivations such as (2). They
hold answers for instance to “At what time was it uttered?”, “Where
was it uttered?” If we were to use those to compare tokens as to type
we would end up with very different typological clusters. But we
don’t use those. We use questions that define the field of phonology.
That may sound more self-righteous than we intend, so let us put
what we have in mind differently: we use the questions that make
phonology as a theoretical field possible. That there are such
questions, by the way, is also an empirical truth about the world!
An analogy that we have used elsewhere, taken from elementary
chemistry, may be helpful here. Think for a moment about a sample
of water, a real sample that you have “experienced” as they say in
California. That sample, like our tokens, is open to a number of
questions: “Where was it situated when you experienced it?”, “Who
owned it?”, “What did you do with it?” that are of no scientific
interest. But it is open to others that are of scientific interest, such
as “What is its boiling point?” “What is its freezing point?” “What
is its molecular weight?” Other samples of stuff get the same answers
to these last questions. They comprise all and only samples of water.
Still other samples, though open to the same questions, get different
answers. They comprise all and only the samples of other distinct
substances, e.g., samples of gold all share one set of answers, samples
of mercury share another set of answers, samples of sulfuric acid
share yet another set, and so on. And still other samples of stuff
don’t hold answers at all to these questions. Pieces of sausage, for
instance, or handfuls of mud, or buckets of shoelaces. These don’t
make up samples of a substance at all! The scientifically interesting

