100

Metaethics from a First Person Standpoint

effect and the lessons of history, but about other people’s needs, desires,
feelings, and reactions.
It occurs to me now that before I came to doubt everything I was taught
a set of rival theories, invented or discovered by the great philosophers
of the past. These included Utilitarianism, Kantianism, and Virtue Theory.
Embedded in their more general accounts of human nature and moral
motivation were certain implied tests for evaluating proposed or completed
courses of action to determine their status as morally permissible, forbidden
(insofar as it is physically possible to do what is morally forbidden),
obligatory, good, wrong, etc. These tests appeared to be constructed more
or less as follows.
1) Utilitarianism: Contemplate the situation facing you and consider how
you could act. Would one possible course of action serve better than
another to increase the total amount of happiness or well-being in the
world, or to decrease the total amount of pain and frustration? If you
have already acted, ask yourself what the consequences of your action
were in this regard.
2) Kantianism: Contemplate your situation and consider how you could
act. Review the various possibilities, asking of each alternative course of
action: What would it be like if everyone did this in the same situation?
Could I coherently will that everyone act in this way in this situation?
If you have already acted, ask yourself whether your action could have
been so willed.
3) Virtue Theory: Contemplate your situation and consider how you could
act or what you did. Does or did a particular course of action exemplify
a virtue, such as truthfulness, fidelity, generosity, temperance, mercy,
or kindness? Does or did it exemplify a vice such as greed, lust, cruelty,
dishonesty, injustice?

Each of these proposed tests divides proposed and completed actions into
distinct evaluative categories. Utilitarianism (of which there are many
subspecies) says that actions that increase the amount of happiness or wellbeing in the world are morally good and ought to be performed, whilst
those that increase the amount of pain and frustration in the world are
morally bad and should be eschewed.21 Kantianism says that actions that
cannot be universalised are forbidden.22 Actions whose opposites cannot
be universalised are obligatory. Virtue theory says to practice virtue and
avoid vice. It is conceivable that applying one of these procedures will lead
me to all and only moral truths. But how could I possibly come to know

