464

konstantin genin

indeed non-black, even if you are looking at a white one. For more on
countable additivity, see Chapter 13 in Kelly (1996).
Now that we have defined probabilism, it is natural to ask how to justify
it: why should a rational agent’s degrees of belief obey the probability
axioms? There are roughly two kinds of answers to this question current
in the Bayesian canon.
The traditional answer is that an agent that violates the axioms of
probability opens herself up to systems of bets that, although fair from the
agent’s perspective, guarantee a sure loss. Answers of this flavor are called
Dutch book arguments and they require positing some connection between
degrees of belief and fair betting quotients. Some epistemologists find
Dutch book arguments to be unconvincing either because they disavow any
tight connection between degrees of belief and betting quotients, or they
deny that any facts about something so pragmatic as betting could have
normative epistemic force. These epistemologists tend to prefer accuracy
arguments, which purport to show that any agent violating the probability
axioms will have beliefs which are less accurate, or “further from the truth,”
than agents that satisfy the axioms. We will briefly review the traditional
Dutch book-style arguments. For the original articulation of the accuracy
perspective see Joyce (1998). For an article-length overview of accuracystyle arguments see Pettigrew (2016b). For a book-length treatment see
Pettigrew (2016a).
Dutch book arguments require specifying some connection between
degrees of belief and fair betting quotients. For de Finetti (1937) the
connection was definitional: an agent’s degree of belief in a proposition
A simply is her fair odds ratio for a bet that pays $1 if A is true and
nothing otherwise. If you are willing to pay at most $.50 for a bet that
pays $1 if A is true and nothing otherwise, then it must be that your
degree of confidence in A is 50%. It is easy to see what is wrong with this
kind of definition: there may be factors other than the subject’s degree of
belief which affect her fair betting quotient. She may be risk averse, or
risk-loving; she may abhor gambling, or love showing off. Ramsey (1931)
avoids some of these problems by pricing bets in utility, rather than money,
and appealing to the existence of an “ethically neutral” proposition that is
considered equally likely to be true and false. For more on the connection
between degrees of belief and betting ratios see Eriksson and Hájek (2007).
Supposing that a suitable connection between degrees of belief and fair
betting quotients exists, it is possible to construct a “Dutch book” against
an agent violating the axioms of probability. To get such an argument
going we suppose that if the agent’s degree of belief in A is p( A), then
she considers fair a bet that costs $p( A) · Y and pays $Y if A is true and
$0 otherwise. Note that we allow Y to take positive and negative values.
This means that the agent is willing to assume the role of the bookie and

