6

Metaethics from a First Person Standpoint

drawn and quartered. I know that cockfights and bullfights have been
considered amusing by many cultures and that ancient people would cut
slabs of flesh off their living cattle to eat.2 Massacres and child armies are
widespread in the contemporary world, as is sex trafficking. The newspaper
brings constant reports of corrupt police officers and politicians. I have
read that the ancient Greeks, with their brilliant mathematicians, poets, and
sculptors, left their unwanted babies on the hillside to die or to be picked
up and raised by strangers.3 Detailed reports of the abuse of children and
old people in nurseries, orphanages, and care homes hit the papers on an
alarmingly regular basis. It seems their caretakers, or some of them anyway,
think that what they are doing is absolutely fine.
I suspect that future generations will look back at some of our current
practices—perhaps the prison system, factory farming, and the treatment
of workers in the garment industry–with the same disapproval with which
we look back on the flogging of sailors and draft animals, the slave trade,
the mutilation of women’s feet, and the guillotine. Many of these practices
and institutions have been abandoned in parts of the world in which they
were formerly common. But did people discover that there were human
rights nobody had known about before? Will people of the future discover
more rights—perhaps the rights of plants, landscapes, or insects—in
addition to ‘human rights’ and ‘animal rights’? Could we decide some day
in the distant future that we were actually mistaken about some human
rights and come to recognise torture, infanticide, and human sacrifice as
morally acceptable?
Meanwhile, there seems to be considerable disagreement about what is
acceptable practice right now. Whenever I open a newspaper, columnists
seem to be arguing about moral issues. Can doctors assist people who say
they want to die, or induce abortion in the second trimester of pregnancy?
Is there anything wrong with creating animals with human genes, and are
quotas for disadvantaged groups fair or unfair? On a personal level, there is
the same controversy and confusion. My vegetarian friends disapprove of
my carnivorous habits, while I think they are being sanctimonious. We argue
over whether one-night stands are fun or hurtful, whether smoking and
heroin addiction are just personal choices or morally irresponsible. Some of
the moral beliefs I held in the past have changed over the years. I used to be
indifferent to charity appeals, now I think I should contribute some money. I
have become more tolerant about some matters, less about others.

