398

franz huber

possible for her. Such ideal agents ought to do exactly that which they
ought to do if they could, where the ‘can’ that is hidden in the ‘could’
expresses possibility for the agent, not metaphysical possibility. Hence the
principle that Ought Implies Can does not put any constraints on what an
ideal agent should do, and on what an ideal doxastic agent should believe.
Belief revision theory models belief as a qualitative attitude towards
sentences or propositions: the ideal doxastic agent believes a proposition,
or she disbelieves the proposition by believing its negation, or she suspends judgment with respect to the proposition and its negation. This
is different from the theory of subjective probabilities, also known as
Bayesianism (Easwaran 2011a, 2011b; Titelbaum, this volume; Weisberg
2011; Wenmackers, this volume), where belief is modeled as a quantitative attitude towards a proposition: the ideal doxastic agent believes a
proposition to a specific degree, her degree of belief, or credence, for the
proposition. However, we will see that, in order to adequately model conditional beliefs and iterated belief revisions, ranking theory also models
the ideal agent’s doxastic state with numbers, and thus more than just the
set of propositions she believes. Genin (this volume) discusses the relation
between belief and degree of belief.
2

belief revision

Spohn (1988, 1990) develops ranking theory in order to fix a problem
that besets the AGM theory of belief revision. In order to provide some
background for ranking theory I will first present the AGM theory. Ranking
theory will then arise naturally out of the AGM theory. The latter theory
derives its name from the seminal paper by Alchourrón et al. (1985).
Comprehensive overviews can be found in Gärdenfors (1988), Gärdenfors
and Rott (1995), Rott (2001), and Lin (this volume).
One version of the AGM theory of belief revision represents the ideal
doxastic agent’s old beliefs, her doxastic state at a given moment in time, by
a set of sentences from some formal language, her belief set, together with
an entrenchment ordering over these sentences. The entrenchment ordering
represents how firmly the ideal doxastic agent holds the beliefs in her
belief set. It represents the details of the ideal agent’s doxastic state. The
new information is represented by a single sentence. The AGM theory
distinguishes between the easy case, called expansion, and the general case,
called revision. In expansion the new information does not contradict the
ideal doxastic agent’s old belief set and is simply added. In revision the
new information may contradict the ideal doxastic agent’s old belief set.
The general case of revision is difficult, because the ideal doxastic agent
has to turn her old belief set, which is assumed to be consistent, into a new
belief set that contains the new information and is consistent. Usually the

