690

C. Rice

significantly enhance the predictive accuracy of the optimality model’’ (Orzack and
Sober 1994, p. 363).
This requirement for an optimality model to provide an adequate explanation is
paralleled by Potochnik’s account. For Potochnik, the context of inquiry will
determine what causal factors must be included, as well as the causal factors that
should be left out of, the best explanation.4 According to her account, the best
explanation of an event E is a model that:
1.
2.
3.

represents the causes of E that figure into the causal relationship of interest in
the particular context of inquiry at hand;
satisfies the criteria of explanatory adequacy; and
is maximally general within these constraints, where the generality that matters
is the number of possible systems the model applies to (Potochnik 2007,
pp. 683–685).

In order for an explanation to qualify as adequate on this account (i.e. condition
two above) it must meet the following criteria:
1.
2.

Pr(E|Cexpl) & Pr(E|C)
Pr(E|Cexpl) & Pr(E|Cexpl ^ Ck) for all Ck (Potochnik 2007, p. 684)

where Cexpl is the set of causes cited in the candidate explanation of event E, C is the
set of all causal factors that influence E, and Ck represents each event that is a causal
influence on E. In short, an adequate explanation should not omit any causal factors
that, if included, would drastically change the expected probability of the event to
be explained.
Given that optimality models are often able to meet this criterion for being
adequate explanations, Potochnik’s account goes on to argue that optimality models
will often be the best explanation available because they provide a focused censored
causal explanation that is more general than the explanation that would be provided
by a model that included additional causal factors (Potochnik 2007, 2010).
According to Potochnik, adding extra causal information to the censored causal
explanation of an optimality model sometimes makes for a worse explanation
because, ‘‘An optimality model highlights a modular part of the causal process that
grounds certain phenotypic generalizations. Incorporating information about other
parts of the causal process can only obfuscate the relationship between the instance
to be explained and other, relevantly similar instances’’ (Potochnik 2007, p. 688).
For Potochnik, optimality models highlight how the event falls into a pattern of
cause and effect, which is independent of the causal factors omitted from the
optimality model (Potochnik 2010, pp. 221–223). In other words, the censored
causal explanations of optimality models highlight the causal processes of interest,
4

Furthermore, Potochnik argues, in some cases causal factors that are causally relevant to the occurrence
of the explanandum (e.g. genetic causes) ought to be omitted from the best explanation of the event. This
distinguishes her account from that of, say, Woodward and Strevens (Strevens 2009; Woodward 2003).
For those authors, causes that make a difference to the explanandum must be included in the best
explanation of an event. Potochnik’s account goes further in suggesting that even for causes that are
required for the event to occur, the context of inquiry may dictate that they should be left out of the best
explanation.

123

