Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997).
Nicola Clayton and others at the University of Cambridge: A couple of examples are Joanna Dally, Nathan Emery, and Nicola Clayton,
“Food-Caching Western Scrub-Jays Keep Track of Who Was Watching When,” Science 312 (2006): 1662–65; and Clayton and Anthony
Dickinson, “Episodic-like Memory During Cache Recovery by Scrub Jays,” Nature 395 (2001): 272–74.
Köhler was a German psychologist who spent four years: See his book The Mentality of Apes, trans. Ella Winter (New York: Harcourt
Brace, 1925).
Second, he used the remarkable case of the French Canadian monk: Merlin Donald’s book Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages
in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991) is still very interesting, though it’s an old book
now. The “Brother John” paper is André Roch Lecours and Yves Joanette, “Linguistic and Other Psychological Aspects of Paroxysmal
Aphasia,” Brain and Language 10, no. 1 (1980): 1–23. In the text I use the past tense about Brother John, but I’ve been unable to find out if
he’s still alive.
Extreme views on both sides of the question are fading: Peter Carruthers, “The Cognitive Functions of Language,” Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 25, no. 6 (2002): 657–74, is a good survey, and is followed by a set of comments by other researchers expressing alternative views.
Here is an example from recent research on young children: The study, presently under review, is Shilpa Mody and Susan Carey, “Evidence
for the Emergence of Logical Reasoning by the Disjunctive Syllogism in Early Childhood.” They found that children younger than three did not
succeed at a task that requires processing a disjunctive syllogism, but three-year-olds did. They also note (citing other work) that although
children use the word “and” shortly after their second birthday, they don’t produce “or” until they are about three. Mody and Carey are
cautious about the interpretation of this finding, and they don’t claim it shows that internalization of this part of public language is enabling
children to succeed on the task.
A well-known experiment that pushes in a similar direction was done by Linda Hermer and Elizabeth Spelke: “A Geometric Process for
Spatial Reorientation in Young Children,” Nature 370 (1994): 57–59, with follow-up work and conclusions discussed in Spelke’s “What Makes
Us Smart: Core Knowledge and Natural Language,” in Dedre Gentner and Susan Goldin-Meadow’s collection, Language in Mind:
Advances in the Investigation of Language and Thought (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003). This work suggested that only humans who
can use language are able to combine information of different kinds (geometry plus color cues) when trying to navigate a room, while rats and
prelinguistic children cannot. However, more recent work seems to have made the significance of these experiments less clear. For the case of
humans, see Kristin Ratliff and Nora Newcombe, “Is Language Necessary for Human Spatial Reorientation? Reconsidering Evidence from
Dual Task Paradigms,” Cognitive Psychology 56 (2008): 142–63. Giorgio Vallortigara has also reported that chickens can solve the task that
gave rats so much trouble; see Vallortigara et al., “Reorientation by Geometric and Landmark Information in Environments of Different Size,”
Developmental Science 8 (2005): 393–401.
But one plausible model, drawing on the work of several people: Daniel Dennett’s Consciousness Explained (New York: Little, Brown
and Co., 1991) is an important source for the outlines of the view. For the idea that inner speech originates in repurposed efference copies, see
Simon Jones and Charles Fernyhough, “Thought as Action: Inner Speech, Self-Monitoring, and Auditory Verbal Hallucinations,”
Consciousness and Cognition 16, no. 2 (2007): 391–99. Peter Carruthers suggests that inner speech is a means for internal “broadcast” that
facilitates deliberate, rational styles of thought in his paper “An Architecture for Dual Reasoning,” in Jonathan Evans and Keith Frankish, eds.,
In Two Minds: Dual Processes and Beyond (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2009). Fernyhough’s book about inner
speech, The Voices Within, will appear from Basic Books in 2016. My thinking about inner speech has also been influenced by Kritika
Yegnashankaran’s PhD thesis, “Reasoning as Action,” Harvard University, 2010.
I’ll now tie these familiar facts to a concept that has become increasingly important: I’ll say more about the framework that introduced
this concept shortly. Good sources are the Merker paper cited earlier: “The Liabilities of Mobility: A Selection Pressure for the Transition to
Consciousness in Animal Evolution,” Consciousness and Cognition 14 (2005): 89–114; and Kalina Christoff et al., “Specifying the Self for
Cognitive Neuroscience,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 15, no. 3 (2011): 104–12.
Without using the term, I introduced the idea of efference copies: I also discussed one of the phenomena that efference copies are
(probably) important in explaining: perceptual constancies. For example, when our eyes jump about (as they routinely do), objects appear to
remain stable. This is one aspect of the family of “constancy” phenomena; other aspects include our ability to compensate for changes in
lighting conditions, something that does not involve actions and efference copies. The role played by efference copies in constancy phenomena
is still being worked out. See W. Pieter Medendorp, “Spatial Constancy Mechanisms in Motor Control,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B 366 (2011): 20100089.
Within a terminology used by Daniel Kahneman and other psychologists, it’s a means for System 2 thinking: Kahneman’s book
Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011) is already a classic. See also Evans and Frankish’s edited collection of
papers, In Two Minds: Dual Processes and Beyond. Dewey did place much emphasis on the imagined rehearsal of actions, especially in his
theory of moral behavior.
Gesturing to the careening inner monologues: See his Consciousness Explained. Dennett does not make use of efference copies in his
model. He ties his account of the origin of the Joycean machine to Richard Dawkins’s notion of the transmission of memes, an idea about
which I’m more skeptical (see Dawkins, The Selfish Gene, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1976).

