Causal Foundations of Evolutionary Genetics 251
determines or 'causes' the left hand side (the period), until we find that
Equation (3) is mathematically equivalent to the following:

T2z

'=4Í- T2z (4)

Now it is obviously absurd to claim, based on this new equation, th

period causes the length of the pendulum. What determines the (il)legit

of the causal reading of each equation? Surely not the meanings of th
ables, for they stay the same in both equations.

The moral of this simple example is that the conceptual analysis is ut

irrelevant to the investigation of the causal nature of some concept un

manipulationist framework. Sober ([2013]) resorts to the breeder's equ

(Equation (2)) to make his case that the fitness variation, measured by

term S on the right-hand side, affects the response to selection in the left

side. But this begs the question. How do we know the breeder's eq
correctly captures the causal flow? Why isn't it like Equation (4),
than Equation (3)?2 We never know, until the causal relationships

the variables are explicitly specified beforehand. Such relations are us

given by a causal model, which also determines a set of equation
allow for causal reading (Pearl [2000]; Spirtes et al. [2000]). It is the

model given by the Newtonian mechanics that authorizes the ca
reading of Equation (3), but not of Equation (4). In the same way,

want to know the effect of intervening on some variable in an evolut

formula, we need the causal model underlying that equation. Hen

second contention - whether fitness or selection causes evolution - hi

on the first: are there causal models underlying evolutionary tran
functions?

The answer is yes. This article describes causal models that (1) in

the relevant variables such as genetic, phenotypic, and environmental f

(2) generate the statistics necessary to describe and predict evolut
trajectories, and (3) can be used to predict the consequence of a p

intervention on an evolving population. The derived models will revea

causal foundations underlying the evolutionary transition functi
described above (Equations (1) and (2)), and help us to determine w
fitness and selection can be properly regarded as causes of evolut
change.

2 In the breeder's equation, the evolutionary response cannot precede fitness variance, and hence
cannot be its cause. But they may be effects of a common cause, or, as statisticalists may argue,
the relation may be 'purely statistical'. In fact, we will later see that, pace Sober, a manipulation
of the fitness variance does not affect the expected evolutionary response predicted by the
breeder's equation.

This content downloaded from 189.216.171.197 on Sat, 02 Dec 2023 00:59:19 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

