698

THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

tences,or even quite how to state theproblemhere; some substantial
technicalquestionsin this area are yet to be solved.
Almost all the extensiverecentliteratureseekingalternativesto
the orthodoxapproach-I would mentionespecially the writingsof
Bas van Fraassen and Robert L. Martin"-agrees on a singlebasic
idea: thereis to be onlyone truthpredicate,applicable to sentences
containingthe predicate itself; but paradox is to be avoided by
allowing truth-valuegaps and by declaring that paradoxical sentences in particularsufferfromsuch a gap. These writingsseem to
me to suffersometimesfroma minordefectand almost always from
a major defect. The minor defect is that some of these writings
criticizea strawmannishversionof the orthodoxapproach, not the
genuinearticle.'3The major defectis that these writingsalmost invariably are mere suggestions,not genuine theories.Almost never
is thereany precise semantical formulationof a language, at least
rich enough to speak of its own elementarysyntax (eitherdirectly
or via arithmetization)and containingits own truthpredicate.Only
ifsuch a language were set up withformalprecisioncould it be said
that a theoryof the semanticparadoxes has been presented.Ideally,
a theoryshouldshowthat the techniquecan be applied to arbitrarily
rich languages, no matter what their "ordinary" predicates other
than truth.And thereis yet anothersense in whichthe orthodoxapproach providesa theorywhile the alternativeliteraturedoes not.
language whose quantiTarski shows how, fora classical first-order
definition
of truth,
fiersrangeover a set, he can give a mathematical
using the predicatesof the object language plus set theory(higherorder logic). The alternativeliteratureabandons the attempt at a
mathematicaldefinitionof truth,and is content to take it as an
12See Martin,ed., The Paradoxof theLiar (New Haven: Yale, 1970) and the
giventhere.
references
13See fn9 above. Martin,forexample,in his papers"Towarda Solutionto the
Liar Paradox,"PhilosophicalReview,LXXVI, 3 (July1967): 279-311,and "On
Grelling'sParadox,"ibid.,LXXVII, 3 (July1968): 325-331, attributesto "the
whichmustbe
on self-reference
theoryoflanguagelevels"all kindsofrestrictions
evenforclassicallanguages,by Godel'swork.Perhaps
as simplyrefuted,
regarded
thereare or have been some theoristswho believedthat all talk of an object
This hardlymatters;the
languagemusttake place in a distinctmetalanguage.
can be carriedout withina classicallanguage,
mainissueis: whatconstructions
Martin
gaps? Almostall the cases of self-reference
and whatrequiretruth-value
can be carriedout by orthodoxGodelianmethodswithoutany needto
mentions
gaps. In fn 5 of his second
invokepartiallydefinedpredicatesor truth-value
rich
that sufficiently
paper Martintakes some noticeof Godel's demonstration
languagescontaintheirown syntax,but he seemsnot to realizethat thiswork
makesmostof his polemicsagainst"languagelevels"irrelevant.
stillseemto thinkthatsomekindofgeneral
somewriters
At theotherextreme,
is helpfulin treatingthesemanticparadoxes.In thecase of
ban on self-reference
sucha positionseemsto me to be hopeless.
sentences,
self-referential

