TRUTH

715

false,respectivelyiffA is true,or false. This captures the intuition
that T(k) is to have the same truthconditionsas A itself;it follows
that T(k) suffers
a truth-valuegap ifA does. An alternateintuition35
would assert that,ifA is eitherfalseor undefined,thenA is nottrue
and T(k) should be false, and its negationtrue.On this view, T(x)
will be a totallydefinedpredicateand thereare no truth-valuegaps.
PresumablyTarski's ConventionT must be restrictedin some way.
It is not difficulto modifythe presentapproach so as to accommodate such an alternateintuition.Take any fixedpointL'(S1,S2).
Modify the interpretationof T(x) so as to make it false of any
sentence outside S. [We call this "closing off" T(x).] A modified
version of Tarski's ConventionT holds in the sense of the conditional T(k) v T(neg(k). =. A
T(k). In particular,if A is a paradoxical sentence,we can now assert -T(k). Equivalently,ifA had a
truthvalue beforeT(x) was closed off,thenA
T(k) is true.
Since the object language obtained by closingoffT(x) is a classical language with every predicate totally defined,it is possible to
definea truth predicate for that language in the usual Tarskian
manner.This predicatewill notcoincidein extensionwiththe predicate T(x) of the object language, and it is certainlyreasonable to
suppose that it is really the metalanguagepredicatethat expresses
the "genuine" concept of truthforthe closed-offobject language;
the T(x) of the closed-offlanguage definestruthforthe fixedpoint
beforeit was closed off.So we still cannot avoid the need for a
metalanguage.
On the basis of thefactthat thegoal ofa universallanguageseems
elusive,some have concludedthat truth-gapapproaches,or any approachesthat attemptto come closerto naturallanguage than does
the orthodoxapproach, are fruitless.I hope that the fertility
of the
presentapproach, and its agreementwith intuitionsabout natural
language in a largenumberofinstances,cast doubt upon such negative attitudes.
There are mathematicalapplications and purelytechnicalproblems which I have not mentionedin this sketch; they would be
beyond the scope of a paper fora philosophicaljournal. Thus there
is the question,whichcan be answeredin considerablegenerality,of
characterizingtheordinala-at whichtheconstructionof the minimal
fixedpointcloses off.If L is the language of first-order
arithmetic,it
turnsout that o-is cw,the firstnonrecursiveordinal.A set is the extensionof a formulawithone freevariable in ?, iffit is fl'I, and it is
5

35 I thinktheprimacy
ofthefirstintuition
can be defendedphilosophically,
and
forthis reasonI have emphasizedthe approachbased on this intuition.The
on the processembodying
alternateintuition
arisesonlyafterwe have reflected
the firstintuition.
See above.

