Frege puzzles

197

that P like the absence of an object. Just as an object o must be there
for you to see o, it must be that P for you to see that P. Moreover,
both object-​seeing and seeing-​that normally require a suitable
causal connection to what is seen: a merely accidental match of
your visual image to something external, e, does not constitute
seeing e.
In Knowledge and Its Limits, I argue that seeing that P is a specific
form of knowing that P. Thus, when we see the apple together, typically, each of us is in a position to know that the other knows that
it is an apple. There would be little point in my judging merely that
you believe that it is an apple, for why should I make that judgment
if I doubt that you see that it is an apple?
Psychologically, seeing-​that seems to be treated as a paradigm of
knowing-​that. ‘See’ is often used in an extended sense for a wide range
of cases of knowing or recognizing (coming to know): ‘I see your
point’; ‘I don’t see how that follows’. What drives the generalization
from literal seeing and other forms of sense perception to knowing?
A key factor is memory. When you turn away, you no longer see that
there are apples on the tree, but you still remember that there are (or
at least were), and many of the effects on action are similar—​you may
still go to the tree when hungry. Remembering that P is another form
of knowing that P. Having seen the agent see the fruit put somewhere,
the rhesus macaques continue attributing knowledge that it is there
to the agent even when they can see that the agent can no longer see
the fruit. A large part of the excess of knowledge over sense perception is simply what remains when sense perception ceases.
In light of these considerations, knowledge attribution looks
rather easier and more natural than philosophers’ preoccupations
make it seem. We should not be surprised that the level of cognitive sophistication required for attributing knowledge turns out
to be lower than the level of cognitive sophistication required for
attributing belief—​just as it can take less to recognize whether
someone knows that P than to recognize whether they have an attitude internally similar to knowing that P.

