Intensional metametaphysics

241

the reference of ‘D’, not to give its meaning (Kripke 1980). Thus ‘D’
is not to be understood as abbreviating a definite description like
‘the number n such that either there is a god and n =​1 or there is no
god and n =​0’. Rather, ‘D’ is simply a name of a natural number; the
stipulation specifies which number. Consequently, the Russellian
proposition semantically expressed by the equation ‘D =​1’ has
none of the complex structure of the definite description, but is
simply something like <identity, <D, 1>>. Obviously, the sentences
‘There is a god’ and ‘There is no god’ have the same truth-​values as
the equations ‘D =​1’ and ‘D =​0’, respectively. If we want to argue
about whether there is a god, we can argue about whether D =​1; it
makes no dialectical difference.
Of course, whichever side is wrong about the metaphysics also
has a false belief about the reference of ‘D’, given that they have been
introduced to the name by the stipulation above. If there is a god,
atheists falsely believe that ‘D’ names 0; if there is no god, theists
falsely believe that ‘D’ names 1. But that does not mean that one side
or the other misunderstands the name ‘D’. It is like the name ‘Jack
the Ripper’, introduced by the description ‘whoever committed the
grisly Whitechapel murders’. Some people may still falsely believe
the wild theory that Edward VII committed the grisly Whitechapel
murders, so that Jack the Ripper was Edward VII; familiar with the
name ‘Jack the Ripper’ in the usual way, they falsely believe that
it names Edward VII, but they do not thereby misunderstand the
name ‘Jack the Ripper’.4
On the Russellian view, if there is a god, the sentence ‘D =​1’
expresses the same proposition as the trivially true sentence ‘1 =​1’;
if there is no god, the sentence ‘D =​0’ expresses the same proposition as the trivially true sentence ‘0 =​0’. On intensionalism, the corresponding necessary propositions are identical too.
4 For relevant discussion of what counts as understanding, see Williamson 2007: 97–​8
and the exchange between Stalnaker 2011 and Williamson 2011b. More generally, the
discussion of analyticity in Williamson 2007 and 2021a support the arguments of this
section.

