474

the oxford handbook of epistemology

like ourselves. A large part of the content of gender roles in patriarchical societies
has to do with the assignment of “maintenance” work. Certain kinds of mundane
work, including housework, cooking, childcare, and nursing of the sick, traditionally have fallen to women, and this is consonant with the pattern of associations
that link women with the body, with material things, and with the concrete and
ephemeral. The content of philosophical thinking has reﬂected that division, with
the result that philosophical questions have been framed in an extremely abstract
way, with little attention paid to the concrete instantiations of the concepts under
investigation.
The Cartesian knower provides a paradigm case. The knower is conceived as
without sex, certainly, indeed without a body, and without particular location.
Now as I took pains to point out at the beginning of this essay, one needn’t saddle
Cartesian epistemologists with the view that knowers actually are Cartesian egoists—they needn’t really believe that one doesn’t need a body in order to know.
But it is assumed that the details about embodiment, or the situation in which
one is embodied, make no difference to the crucial phenomena and relations. We
could as well be Cartesian egos—or brains in vats—justiﬁcation and knowledge
would be just as before.
Now to my mind, the ﬁrst and most devastating challenge to this way of
thinking of epistemology came from Quine (who was most assuredly male!) in
his attack on the programme of rational reconstruction within epistemology.
Quine’s point was that any attempt to ﬁgure out how we ought to go about seeking
knowledge and revising belief in light of experience—any attempt at a normative
epistemology—had to begin by investigating empirically those cases in which our
knowledge-seeking behavior had been successful. And one of the ﬁrst things that
such inquiry will bring to light is the fact that it matters very much to our
knowledge-seeking that we are embodied beings, and how we are embodied. Consider: an eternal being, who had no need for nourishment or rest, would have no
reason to tolerate epistemic risk, and hence no need of any kind of inductive logic.
We, on the other hand, operate under tight constraints—we have to make up our
minds well before the evidence is all in, or we don’t live to publish our results.
Given all this, the best way to develop a normative epistemology, according to
Quine, is to take seriously the kinds of constraints that beings like ourselves must
negotiate, and discover the strategies that enable us to succeed in coming to know
what we are able to come to know.
Some feminist theorists ﬁnd in this, Quine’s “naturalized epistemology,” a
good framework for addressing the epistemological questions that are pressing for
those of us interested in promoting social change, and for repairing the deﬁciencies in Cartesian epistemology that led to the neglect of various aspects of knowing.31 (Quine, it should be said, never condoned this particular application of his
theory.) For example, it has seemed to feminists that there is a great need for a
better understanding of the social dimensions of knowing. Of course, Longino

