186

the oxford handbook of epistemology

Although I do not argue the issue here, I think that Pascal was mistaken about
his second point.7 However, I think he was essentially correct in saying that the
pragmatic beneﬁts of a belief can in principle be relevant to its rationality. In the
sections that follow, I propose a general theory of rationality, and within the
context of this theory I illustrate how the pragmatic consequences of a belief can
potentially affect the rationality of our having that belief. Nevertheless, I also argue
that within the framework of the general theory, it is possible to explain and
defend our general intellectual practice of not taking the pragmatic beneﬁts of a
belief into account in deliberations and debates about what to believe.

3. T H E E P I S T E M I C G O A L

...................................................................................................................................................................

In evaluating the rationality of beliefs, epistemologists have traditionally been concerned not just with any intellectual goal but rather with a very speciﬁc goal, that
of now having beliefs that are both accurate and comprehensive. This goal has
two aspects, either of which could be championed more easily on its own than
in tandem with the other. If the goal were only to have accurate beliefs, the strategy
would be to believe only that which is maximally certain, whereas if the goal were
only to have comprehensive beliefs, the strategy would be to believe as much as
possible.
Note also the synchronic character of the goal. The goal is not to have accurate
and comprehensive beliefs at some future time but rather to have such beliefs
now. To understand the signiﬁcance of characterizing the goal in this way, imagine
that my prospects for having accurate and comprehensive beliefs a year from now
would be enhanced by now believing something for which I lack adequate evidence. For example, suppose that P involves a more favorable assessment of my
intellectual talents than the evidence warrants, but suppose also that believing P
would make me more intellectually conﬁdent than I would be otherwise, which
would make me a more dedicated inquirer, which in turn would enhance my
long-term prospects of having accurate and comprehensive beliefs. Despite these
long-term beneﬁts, there is an important sense of rational belief, indeed the very
sense that traditionally has been of the most interest to epistemologists, in which
it is not rational for me now to believe P. Moreover, the point of this example is
not affected by shortening the time period in which the beneﬁts are forthcoming.
It would not be rational, in this sense, for me now to believe P if we were instead
to imagine that believing P would somehow improve my prospects for having
accurate and comprehensive beliefs in the next few weeks, or in the next few

