are not uniquely responsible for the reliable transmission of organismic form across
generations; they should be treated as just one developmental resource among many, not a
repository of information about how to build an organism.
The issues raised by DST, in particular the critique of genetic information, are difficult
ones, with deep historical roots. (Developmental biologists have traditionally been wary of the
notion of genetic information, and of the hegemony of genetics in biology.) One
philosophically interesting aspect of the DST approach is its plea for ‘causal democracy’, that
is, for treating all the causal factors responsible for organismic development equally, rather
than privileging genes (cf. Oyama 2000). The idea of causal democracy seems reasonable; if a
given phenomenon is known to have multiple causes, it makes sense to accord all of them
equal status, at least until the greater importance of one has been empirically demonstrated.
However, at times the advocates of DST have defended the notion of causal democracy in a
suspiciously a priori way, as if according parity to the various factors responsible for
organismic development is an absolute methodological imperative, rather than something
responsible to empirical data. I suggest that this is a mistake. Even if the notion of genetic
information cannot be made philosophically respectable, it is still possible that genes turn out
to play far more important a role in explaining organismic development than other causal
factors. Whether this is so is something that we will only know when molecular
developmental genetics has run its course.

FURTHER READING
Bill Shipley’s book Cause and Correlation in Biology (2000) contains a good discussion of
Wright’s work on path analysis and Fisher’s work on randomized experiments, including the
relation of their work to modern causal graph theory. Elliott Sober’s The Nature of Selection
(1984) is the best philosophical discussion of causal concepts in evolutionary theory; this is
where Sober introduces the selection of/for distinction and the distinction between variational
and selectional explanation. Two good biological works discussing causation in relation to
evolution are Michael Wade and Susan Kalisz’s paper ‘The Causes of Natural Selection’
(1990) and John Endler’s book Natural Selection in the Wild (1986). A useful collection of
papers on teleological concepts in biology is Colin Allen, Marc Bekoff, and George Lauder
(eds.), Nature’s Purposes (1998); also useful is David Buller (ed.), Function, Selection and
Design (SUNY, 1999). On causation and genetics, Sahotra Sarkar’s book Genetics and
Reductionism (1998) provides a detailed discussion of most of the important issues, including
the limitations of heritability analysis. Elliott Sober’s paper ‘Apportioning Causal
Responsibility’ (Journal of Philosophy 1988: 303–18) examines the problem of quantifying
the relative importance of different causal factors, with particular reference to genetics. The
papers in Susan Oyama, Paul Griffiths, and Russell Gray’s edited collection Cycles of
Contingency (2001) defend the developmental systems theory perspective; a good critique is
provided by Peter Godfrey-Smith in ‘Explanatory Symmetries, Preformation and
Developmental Systems Theory’ (2000).

REFERENCES

