inference and discourse. Without such causal references, it seems, one would have at most a
very long narrative about, rather than a genuine explanation of, causal discourse.

5. CAUSAL REDUCTIONISM
What can Hume grant to causal reductionists? First, of course, he can agree that many
causal judgements are true. More specifically, he can grant that constant conjunction—or
rather, the very specific kind of constant conjunction that is in fact detected by the corrected
causal sense, with its specific standards of relevant resemblance—is both necessary and
sufficient for the existence of a causal relation. Indeed, this constant conjunction is—like the
satisfaction of Hume’s coextensive second definition of ‘cause’—necessary and sufficient for
the existence of a causal relation that is itself an example of causal necessity. Were this not
the case, he could not conclude, as he does in ‘Of liberty and necessity’ (THN 2. 3. 1 and EHU
8), that the uniform conjunction of particular kinds of human actions with particular kinds of
circumstances, characters, and motives, is (like the satisfaction by these things of the
coextensive second definition of ‘cause’) sufficient for the causal necessity of those actions—
regardless of other respects in which the activity of minds might differ from that of bodies.
Furthermore, he can also grant that the relation of causation might well be the relation of this
particular kind of constant conjunction, just as the quality of redness may prove to be the
quality of having a certain surface reflectance property, and the quality of virtue to be the
possession of features of character useful or agreeable to their possessor or others.
But while Hume is friendly to these metaphysical claims of the reductionist, he would deny
nearly all of the semantic reductionism that has often supported them. He would deny that
either of his two definitions of ‘cause’ is synonymous with the term ‘cause’ itself; for under
the most natural standard for individuating concepts, they specify three different concepts. (It
is just as well, of course, that neither definition is synonymous with ‘cause’; Hume treats the
definitions as parallel, and they are obviously not synonymous with each other.) In fact, the
Humean concept of CAUSATION has no semantic analysis into conceptual parts at all.
(Similarly, more specific causal concepts such as those expressed by the transitive verbs
‘move’, ‘drop’, and ‘convince’ can be semantically simple and need not have the more general
concept CAUSATION as a part.) He would also deny the related epistemological claim that
knowledge of constant conjunction is alone sufficient for knowledge of causal relations—for
in addition, one must know, a posteriori, that constant conjunction is what the causal sense
detects.
Finally, Hume has reason to be sceptical of a broad and rather vague metaphysical claim
often made by (and even more often ascribed to) reductionists: namely, that there is definitely
‘nothing more to causation than constant conjunction’. Of course, if this means simply that
causation is the same relation as a particular kind of constant conjunction, then he can grant
that it may well be true. But even if that is true, there may be additional features of cause-andeffect pairs that are highly relevant to their being so related—just as there might be underlying
subatomic features of bodies in virtue of which they have given surface reflectance properties,
or features of human physiology intimately tied up with having features of character that are
useful or agreeable to their possessor or others. Indeed, being so related as to produce

