quickly to conclusions. They fail to generate multiple options. Even
many less experienced doctors do the same thing. Thus, when the
police officer went to the urgent-care clinic complaining of an
earache, the doctor there assumed the problem was an infection of
some sort—which would have been the correct answer in most cases
—and didn’t worry about the seemingly irrelevant fact that one of the
patient’s pupils was acting up.
Unlike medical students, expert diagnosticians have built
sophisticated mental representations that let them consider a number
of different facts at once, even facts that at first might not seem
germane. This is a major advantage of highly developed mental
representations: you can assimilate and consider a great deal more
information at once. Research on expert diagnosticians has found that
they tend to see symptoms and other relevant data not as isolated bits
of information but as pieces of larger patterns—in much the same way
that grandmasters see patterns among chess pieces rather than a
random assortment of pieces.
And just as chess masters’ representations allow them to quickly
generate a number of possible moves and then zero in on the best one,
experienced diagnosticians come up with a number of possible
diagnoses and then analyze the various alternatives to select the most
likely one. Of course, the doctor may ultimately decide that none of
the options work, but the process of reasoning through each of them
may well have led to still other possibilities. This ability to generate a
number of likely diagnoses and carefully reason through them
distinguishes expert diagnosticians from the rest.
The solution to the medical mystery described in the New York
Times required precisely that sort of approach: first come up with
possible explanations for why a patient should have both Horner’s
syndrome and a knifelike pain in the ear, and then analyze each
possibility to find the right answer. Stroke was one possibility, but the
patient had nothing in his background that indicated he might have
had a stroke. Shingles could also produce the patient’s two symptoms,
but he had none of the usual signs of shingles such as blisters or a
rash. A third possibility was a tear in the wall of the carotid artery,
which runs right alongside the nerve affected in Horner’s and also
passes near the ear. A slight tear in the artery can allow blood to leak
through the inner walls of the artery, causing a bulge in its outer wall,

