c h a pt e r f i v e

The main tenets of Cope’s theory were presented in three essays, all
of which were collected in Origin of the Fittest: “Consciousness in Evolution,” ﬁrst published in 1875; “On Archaesthetism,” ﬁrst published in
1882; and “Catagenesis; or, Creation by Retrograde Metamorphosis of
Energy,” ﬁrst published in 1884. The theory was also summarized in his
contribution to the Christian Register symposium in 1887. One of Cope’s
boldest moves was to claim that consciousness is not a result but a cause
of evolution: evolution tends toward unconsciousness and automatism,
and not toward consciousness. This evolution from consciousness to
automatism was made possible by “the property of protoplasm to organize machinery which shall work automatically in the absence of consciousness” and was related to what Cope called “the doctrine of the
unspecialized.”47 According to this doctrine, generalized types—adaptable and without “mechanical peculiarities in their structure”—­are ancestral to more specialized types. Cope applied this doctrine of the unspecialized to mental evolution as well: “The greater the proportion of
unconscious automatism of habits, the less the power of adaptation. . . .
The greater the degree of consciousness of stimulus, the greater will be the
degree of adaptability to new relations, and to such constant rousing the
unspecialized mind is always open.”48 Both Cope and King argued that
plasticity underpinned evolvability, but Cope also saw consciousness as
playing an essential role.
A few years later, Cope began using the term “archaesthetism” (from
the Greek archē, beginning, and aisthēsis, sensation) to refer to “the hypothesis of the primitive and creative function of consciousness.” He
argued for archaesthetism as follows: adaptive response, and thus progressive evolution, requires a “generalized dynamic condition” of matter; “wherever this generalized condition exists, consciousness will be
present”; consciousness thus existed at the beginning of evolution and
has been its main driver. Cope supported his second premise by claiming that living beings differ from the nonliving in that “their actions
have some deﬁnite reference to their well being or pleasure, or their
preservation from injury or pain, and are varied with circumstances as
they arise.” He also invoked more familiar neo-­Lamarckian points about
directed variation and use/disuse: “If the law of modiﬁcation of structure by use and effort be true, it is evident that consciousness or sensibility must play an important part in evolution.” As Cope summarized in
1884, the hypothesis of archaesthetism “maintains that consciousness
47. Cope, The Origin of the Fittest: Essays on Evolution (New York: D. Appleton, 1887), 395–­96.
48. Cope, Origin of the Fittest, 401.

214

