62

CHAPTER 3 The only ultimate test of the theory of natural selection

knowledge which is too much neglected” (Weldon, 1894, p. 25). He then, however,
turns to a frontal assault on Bateson’s commitment to discontinuity. Why, according to Bateson, should we believe that the variation that produces species is, in fact,
discontinuous? Because species are discontinuous, while their environments (at least
in terms of physical parameters like temperature, altitude, and so forth) are broadly
continuous. Discontinuity must, then, arise through the process of variation. Weldon
is not convinced. Setting aside the fact that many environmental parameters are in
fact not continuous, Weldon points to an obvious source of discontinuity in the “environment”—interactions with other organisms, a possible cause which Bateson has
only dismissed in a cursory footnote. Further, in cases where Bateson has amassed
much data of discontinuous variation (his favorites being cases of whole-unit, integer
variation like vertebrae or teeth), he has neglected the biases induced by preservation. Extremely small teeth or vertebra are unlikely to be preserved in specimens,
and thus without extremely careful study (down to the cellular level, Weldon writes)
of samples taken expressly for the purpose, we have no reason to think that the only
options are either an entire tooth or no tooth at all. Carefully collected, large-samplesize statistical data would have done better. As he closes the review, “a careful histological account of the jaws of five hundred dogs would have done more to show the
least possible size of a tooth in dogs than all the information so painfully collected.
And so in many other cases” (Weldon, 1894, p. 25).
Further fuel for the controversy came from unusual quarters. A bitter dispute
arose in the correspondence to Nature over some examples of cultivated plants in the
genus Cineraria which had been discussed by W. T. Thiselton-Dyer (1895; see also
Cock and Forsdyke, 2008, pp. 150–154). This controversy, in turn, was the result of
the presentation of a paper of Weldon’s—to which we shall soon turn—which had
been developed under the auspices of a Royal Society “Committee for Conducting
Statistical Inquiries into the Measurable Characteristics of Plants and Animals,”
which Weldon had formed in partnership with Galton, Darwin’s son Francis, and
a few other well-known biologists at the end of 1892. This committee, Weldon had
hoped, could serve as a way to centralize statistical work on the measurement of
variability in organisms. Bateson, however, saw it as a threat, and set about attacking
its work in earnest shortly after the dust-up over the Cineraria. The whole episode
would end with Bateson being appointed to the committee as a conciliatory gesture,
followed by his stacking the committee with his own allies in 1897, and the resignation of the biometricians en masse 2 years later, in 1899. In short, it amplified and
focused the already deep and profound animus which existed between Bateson’s
group and that of Pearson and Weldon.
This debate, however, will hardly feature in my narrative. After all, ours is a story
about the introduction of chance, probability, and statistics into our picture of the
evolving world, and Bateson and his group never really understood those methods
well enough to be able to inveigh against them in a serious way. Their critiques remain, rather, largely at the level of a general opposition to the use of mathematical
methods in the first place. Furthermore, as we shall see throughout the rest of the
book, the historiographical tendency to reduce the contributions of all the figures in
this time period—biometrician and Batesonian (later, Mendelian) alike—to simply

