Philosophy of Biology

18
property changes

give rise to

kinematic
properties

properties of

entities

particular trends

dynamical principles

Figure 2 A generalized schema for interpreting the dynamics of a system.
biology. Further, it transcends even discussions of probabilistic or statistical
theories – a diagram such as this could readily be instantiated in the context of
a deterministic theory as well.13 Before we unpack it further, however, a few
disclaimers are in order, given that this diagram involves importing a number
of terms that are not commonly found in the philosophy of biology.
Properties and Trends
First, it is taken as an assumption here that the sense in which entities bear
properties is unproblematic, and hence we owe no further explanation of
the “properties of” arrow in Figure 2.14 Also, I take it that the “particular
trends” in which we are interested at both the macro and micro levels are set
independently, whether by our interests in building theories (i.e., they are the
target of a specific class of explanations that we would like to offer) or by being
the subset of property changes picked out by the dynamical principles, which
we have identified independently. In our case, the particular trends at issue are
various ways of instantiating natural selection – which we already, in some
intuitive sense, believe to be the set of changes to individual or population
trajectories brought about by variations in fitness and leading to adaptation.
We thus have an independent handle on the phenomena we wish to explain; the
devil is in the details of the causal story that gives rise to those changes.
Kinematics versus Dynamics
Second, on the distinction between kinematics and dynamics. Strictly speaking,
kinematics refers to properties concerning motion – here, as is often the case
in theoretical physics, the motion of an entity through a state space. To pick up
our example, some kinds of changes in the properties of individuals will result
in changes in lineage structures, and some kinds of changes in the properties
13

This means that the question of causation in natural selection is not merely one of the
interpretation of probability or the role of statistics.
14 Of course, contemporary metaphysics has by no means settled the way in which this is supposed
to work (Loux, 2006, ch. 1–3), but those complexities are thankfully unimportant for us here.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 201.141.16.192, on 28 Sep 2021 at 16:48:09, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108680691

