Evidence-Based Policy 205

that the causal effect of interest differs between populations. Providing bed
nets free of charge may be the best policy in Uganda but selling them at a
nominal fee more effective in India.
In general, every study is subject to external validity issues, observational
and experimental, and among the experimental studies randomized or not
randomized. If one measures the causal effect of growth in money supply
on inflation or changes in nominal income using US data between 1960
and 1990, the result might not hold for the USA of the 2000s or for the
Netherlands in the same period. External validity is a problem for everyone,
and it would be a mistake to criticize RCTs for that reason.
But there are some peculiarities that make the external validity problem
more pressing for RCTs than for other methods. As explained above,
RCTs, when implemented successfully, give us knowledge “cheaply” in
the sense that they require no specific background knowledge in order to
identify a causal effect from the data. But this does come at an eventual
cost: if the understanding of the causal structure that is being experimented on in the RCT is very limited, there are no good grounds for
believing that a result will also hold in this or that population that differs
from the test population.
In a sense an RCT is a “black-box” method of causal inference. A treatment is administered, an outcome observed, with no need for any understanding of what is going on in between and why a treatment produces its
outcome. But if there is no knowledge of why a treatment produces a given
outcome, the basis for drawing inferences beyond the immediate test population is very narrow.
This is different, for example, with respect to alternative methods such as
structural or other theory-driven forms of econometrics. Consider the example
discussed in Chapter 9 regarding Maimonides’ rule as an instrument for class
size. The paper by Miguel Urquiola and Eric Verhoogen criticized the choice
of Maimonides’ rule as an instrument on the basis of a detailed model about
how parents choose schools for their kids and schools make decisions about
the quality of education they offer (Urquiola and Verhoogen 2009). Such a
model, if correct, gives us a lot of information about why a causal relation
holds when it does. Having this information then allows us to make reasonable guesses about where else outside the experimental study it might hold.
Another problem related to that of external validity is the possible existence of so-called “general equilibrium effects” (Morgan and Winship 2007).
General equilibrium effects obtain when an intervention changes the causal
structure of a population not because of the intervention as such but rather
because the intervention is extended from a small sample to the population at
large. For instance, a new schooling program that aims to improve test scores
by reducing class size might work for a small sample of schools that receive
the experimental treatment. When extended to all schools, however, it ceases
to work because there aren’t enough well-qualified teachers to take charge of
all the new classes. The program works “holding fixed” other determinants

