would have regarded fastidious-ness in style as effeminacy if not narcissism, and were far too
engrossed with what they were saying to give much thought to how they were saying it. If
there is anyone who reads Aristotle or Kant or Hegel or Whitehead for the joy of perfect
expression, I have yet to hear of him. These men did not need style to save them, for they
had something more important. I would go further and say that a preoccupa-tion with style
may sterilize a philosopher or even an artist. When an artist becomes so “abstract,” so lost
in pure form, that he has nothing left to express, he finds himself in a vacuum, and the
step is not a long one from inanity to insanity. A philosopher who is precious, mannered,
and self-conscious is a bore, either in person or on paper. But that style, though not allimportant, is important nevertheless is plain enough if we pair some eminent names that
naturally occur together. If you were to cover a stretch of a hundred pages in either Plato
or Aristotle, which would you find more inviting? If you knew that the same theory had
been set out by Bradley and Bosanquet, to which would you turn the more willingly? The
fact is that we want of our philosophers, as of our artists, both forms of the love of truth.
“Subject without style,” said Professor Collingwood, “is barbarism; style without subject is
dilettantism. Art is the two together.”
When we turn to look more closely at this craft of philosophic expression, we find to our
relief that it is less exacting that the art of the true man of letters. What the philosopher
must manage to embody in words in not the whole of him, nor the impulsive and imaginative part of him, but his intellectual part, his ideas and their connections. And his prime
object must be to convey these to his readers at the cost of a minimum of effort on their
part. He must get them to follow a process of distinguishing, abstracting, and inferring – in
short, of thinking. That implies thinking on their part as well as his; and thinking is hard
work.
Now the way to save work for the reader is simply to write clearly. How easy it is to say
that! “Simply to write clearly”—as if that were not one of the hardest things in the world!
It is hard even to say what clearness means, let alone exemplify it in speech and writing.
Indeed, there is no such thing if taken by itself; it lies in the relation between a giver-out and
a taker-in. if there is trouble, it is sometimes wholly with the taker-in. Many a schoolboy
has thought Euclid abominably obscure, and so he was—to the schoolboy. We have all
known students who say helpless before philosophers who were classics of clarity. On the
other hand there are some purveyors of philosophy who pass all under-standing, no matter
whose. A master expositor, W. K. Clifford, said of an acquain-tance: “He is writing a book on
metaphysics, and is really cut for it; the clearness with which he thinks he understands things

10

