PART II : EXPLANATION, C AUSATI O N , AND LAWS
explanation, " but not a dictionary definition. A dictionary definition merely
reports how scientists and others actually use the words "scient ific explanation ." Traditional philosophy of science seeks a checklist of conditions that any
scientific explanation should satisfy. When all are satisfied, the checklist guarantees the scientific adequacy of an explanation. In other words, the traditional
approach seeks a set of conditions individually necessary and jointly sufficient
for something being a scientific explanation. This "explicit " definition , or as it
was sometimes called, this "explication " or "rat ional reconstruction " of the
dictionary definition , would render the concept of scientific explanation precise
and philosophically well founded. Carl Hempel offers such definitions or rational
reconstructions of what he considers to be two basic types of scientific explanation: Deductive-Nomological and Probabilistic or Probabilistic-Statistical
Explanation . His definitions make explicit what has long been assumed: that
explanation in science is driven by laws of nature or our best hypotheses about
what these laws are.
An explicit definition, such as the one Hempel seeks, gives the necessary
and sufficient conditions for a thing, event, state, process, property to be an
instance of the term defined. For example, triangle is explicitly defined as
"plane figure having three sides. " Since the conditions are together sufficient
we know that everything which fulfills them is a Euclidean triangle and since
the conditions are individually necessary, we know that if just one is not
satisfied by an item, it is not a Euclidean triangle. The beauty of such definitions is that they remove vagueness, and provide for maximally precise
definitions.
An explicit definition or "explicat ion" of the notion of a scientific explanation
could serve the prescriptive task of a litmus test or yardstick for grading and
improving explanations in the direction of increasing scientific adequacy. The
demand that philosophical analysis result in such a precise and complete definition is in part a reflection of the influence of mathematical logic on the Logical
Positivists and their immediate successors in the philosophy of science, like
Hempel. For in mathematics concepts are introduced in just this way-by providing explicit definitions in terms of already understood previously introduced
concepts. The advantage of such definitions is clarity: there will be no borderline
cases and no unresolvable arguments about whether some proposed explanation is "scient ific" or not. The disadvantage is that it is often impossible to give
such a complete definition or "explicat ion" for most concepts of interest. One
way to show that the concept of explanation is not amenable to such rational
reconstruction is to devise counter-examples-bona fide scientific explanations
that do not satisfy the definition , and non-explanations that do satisfy it, thus
showing that the concept in question fa ils to capture the essence of scientific
explanation. This is van Fraassen's strategy in "The Pragmatics of Explanation. "
He goes on to argue that explanation is not as Hempel assumes, a logical

40

