138 Logical Consequence via Models

variable, and different nonlogical expressions with different variables; “same semantic category” means that we use individual variables for names, class variables
for predicates, and so on.) Tarski defines a model of 𝐾 as an assignment of values
to the variables that satisfies all the open formulas in 𝐾′ .15 He can then define
logical consequence as follows:
The sentence 𝑋 follows logically from the sentences of the class 𝐾 if and only
if every model of the class 𝐾 is also a model of the sentence 𝑋. (Tarski 1983a,
p. 417)

This is a mathematically rigorous definition, because Tarski has shown elsewhere
(Tarski 1935; see Tarski 1983b) how to give a rigorous definition of satisfaction,
and hence of the model of relation.
When there are finitely many premises, logical consequence in the sense Tarski
defines here reduces to the truth of a quantified sentence of higher-order logic.
For example, (19) is valid if and only if

∀𝑋∀𝑥∀𝑦(𝑋𝑥 ⊃ 𝑋𝑦).
One can easily see that whether this condition holds does not depend on the
language’s particular stock of nonlogical expressions.
5.2.6 Satisfying the criteria of adequacy

Tarski says that it can be proved that his definition of logical consequence satisfies
his criteria of adequacy, Formality and Truth Preservation, as embodied in condition (F). In evaluating this claim, we must return to the question whether the
modal in Truth Preservation takes narrow scope (17) or wide scope (18).
On the narrow-scope interpretation, Truth Preservation says that if 𝑋 is a
logical consequence of 𝐾 in Tarski’s sense, then it cannot happen that: all the
sentences in 𝐾 are true and 𝑋 is not true. It is not clear how this follows from
Tarski’s definition. Tarski’s definition says that if 𝑋 is a logical consequence of
𝐾, then there are no assignments of values to variables that satisfy a certain set of
open formulas. That is a claim about what there is, not about what there must be.
So if we read Truth Preservation with narrow scope, Tarski’s definition does not
vindicate it.
On the wide-scope interpretation, by contrast, Truth Preservation says that
it cannot happen that: 𝑋 is a logical consequence of 𝐾 in Tarski’s sense, all the
15
Actually, instead of talking of assignments, he talks of sequences of objects. This is because an
assignment of values to variables can be represented mathematically as a sequence: the first value is
assigned to the first variable, the second to the second, and so on. Remember that “objects,” for Tarski,
includes items at all levels of the type hierarchy: ordinary objects, classes of objects, classes of classes,
and so on.

