2^ 6

|

C h. 2

R a t i o n a l i t y , O b j e c t i v i t y , and V a l u e s in S c i e n c e

of opinion about which rules to adopt? In that case, scientists must have
recourse to the axiological level. For disputes about methodological rules
can be rationally resolved only by specifying the goals that the rules are
supposed to serve. If scientists all shared the same views about the aims
of science, then, in principle, the dispute could be settled by seeing which
rules would best promote those aims. But if scientists disagree about aims,
then no rational resolution is possible. If, for exam ple, one group of sci­
entists insists that em pirical adequacy is the most important goal of sci­
entific theorizing, w hile another group maintains, with equal vigor, that
science should aim at providing intelligible explanations, then the two
groups have no objective, rational way of settling their dispute. According
to the hierarchical m odel, the rational resolution of axiological disagree­
ments is impossible because it would require going to a higher level, and
there is no such level.
Admittedly, this is a highly idealized and sim plified sketch of the
hierarchical m odel, but it suffices to illustrate two of its central features.
First, the direction of justification is strictly top-down and linear: always
from a higher level to a lower one, never the reverse. Second, at the
highest level, the axiological, rational justification ceases. On the hierar­
chical model, views about the goals and aims of science are necessarily
arbitrary and subjective. Although they are viewed as the ultim ate source
of justification for the decisions m ade at the lower levels, they themselves
cannot be justified.
T he R e t ic u la t io n a l M odel o f S c ie n t if ic Rationality

According to Laudan, a m isleading picture of scientific rationality pushes
Kuhn to conclude that reason and argum ent play only a lim ited role in
scientific revolutions. For, once one accepts the hierarchical model, dis­
agreements about the criteria for assessing theories will be incapable of
rational resolution if, as Kuhn supposes, rival paradigms have competing
notions of the aims and goals of science. Another error contributing to
Kuhn’s em brace of relativism is his holism , his insistence that paradigms
are seamless wholes. Kuhn assumes that paradigms are package deals that
can be accepted or rejected only in their entirety. Specifically, he denies
that scientists can evaluate or choose among the individual components
of a paradigm, especially at the methodological and axiological levels.
Laudan advocates the reticulational model of scientific rationality. Its
two m ain features—its antiholism and its nonlinear conception of
justification—directly contradict the hierarchical model. According to the
reticulational model, the components of a paradigm can be discussed,
rejected, or accepted piecem eal. Like M cM ullin, Laudan criticizes Kuhn’s
assumption that paradigms have a kind of holistic unity that would make
such a dissection impossible. He supports his case with historical examples
in which scientists clearly did pick and choose elem ents from the para-

