Philosophy of Developmental Biology

43

interest of tractability or computability (such as frictionless motion or point
particles in mechanics).
The French Flag Model abstracts from:
(1) processes that link the morphogen gradient to gene expression patterns in
the recipient cells; it merely supposes that such processes exist.
(2) the temporal dimension in looking only at the causal dependencies of cell fate
on the morphogen concentration. (Perhaps it doesn’t abstract completely
from temporality in supposing that the gradient is formed before the cells
become committed, but it disregards any events that happen in between.)
While (1) seems to be a clear case of an abstraction, (2) looks more like an
idealization, because morphogen systems could be dynamic, in which case time
cannot be omitted on pains of distorting reality (see Section 3.3). Abstracting from
time works only if the formation and the interpretation of the gradient are separate
processes that don’t interact (perhaps because the interpretation only begins once
the gradient has formed). But this could be false, as we shall see (Section 3.3).
In addition, there are the following assumptions, which also have the ring of
idealizations:
(3) Only three qualitatively distinct cell fates.
(4) Determinism (i.e., all cells react to a given morphogen concentration in
the same way).
(5) Sharp morphogen thresholds (as opposed to downstream causal interactions) account for the precision of compartment boundaries.
(6) No variation in the morphogen gradient between individual embryos;
developmental noise is neglected.
(7) No other factors that actually vary affect cell fates (i.e., the morphogen is
the actual-difference making cause of cell fate in the sense of Waters
(2007) and fully accounts for differences in these).
(8) The generation and interpretation of positional information are independent processes.
(9) The morphogen acts only via its concentration and not via additional
properties (e.g., exposure time).
(10) Different body axes are patterned independently.
Most of these assumptions, while not impossible (unlike point particles), were
never very likely, given what embryologists already knew when Wolpert proposed the model; so it is clear that the model was never intended to be a faithful
representation of the world. It’s an idealized causal model. I will discuss in
Section 3.3 what idealizations the model incorporates and how these idealizations guided research.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 201.141.17.62, on 16 Mar 2022 at 22:01:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108954181

