88

Theories of Meaning

grammatical strings do. And the idea of grammaticality is a sophisticated one, even
though it is grasped however dimly by 4-year-olds.
Third, consider the category of what linguists used to call semi-grammatical utterance.
Some of the utterances that people produce are only semi-grammatical, in that if their
words were written down on paper, the result would not count as an entirely grammatical
sentence by some rule of grammar (it has some grammatical infelicity in it), but it is
coherent enough to be understood. In fact, I suspect most people talk that way most of the
time. At the very least, we all do things like making false starts, and we all engage vigorously
in mid-course editing. Yet not only do we get understood by our hearers; nobody even
notices. We correct for semi-grammaticality quite automatically. That correction is a
theoretical move made by our brains, and yet another abstraction away from speech events
in the real world.
2 Paragraph 43 of Wittgenstein’s (1953) Philosophical Investigations is famously misquoted. It reads, “For a large class of cases—though not for all—in which we employ
the word ‘meaning’ it can be deﬁned thus: the meaning of a word is its use in the
language.” Wittgenstein was very serious about “though not for all”; he did not hold that
“meaning is use,” period. Indeed, he was allergic to universal generalizations. He
thought it a deep defect of philosophy that philosophy seeks universal generalizations;
the real world, he contended, is always more complicated than that.
As Georg Henrik von Wright put it, Wittgenstein “lived on the border of mental illness
. . . throughout his life” (“Biographical Sketch,” in Norman Malcolm, Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1958). Wittgenstein also distinguished himself from most twentieth-century English-speaking philosophers by having
had quite an interesting life; see Ray Monk’s wonderful biography, Ludwig Wittgenstein:
The Duty of Genius (New York: Free Press, Maxwell Macmillan International, 1990).
3 Reported by Norman Malcolm (1958: 65). “A central idea of his philosophy, the notion
of a ‘language-game,’ apparently had its genesis in this incident.”
4 Horwich (1998) offers a similar if less well worked-out picture. Unlike Brandom, he
emphasizes that individual expressions have meanings: a given expression’s “meaning
property” is “its use being governed by such-and-such regularity—or, more speciﬁcally,
the property that every use of the word is explained in terms of the fact that we accept
certain speciﬁed sentences containing it” (p. 6, italics original). For each word, there is a
“basic use regularity.” Examples: We tend to accept “That’s red” (if it is actually uttered)
in the presence of a red thing; we accept “p and q” if we accept p and we accept q.
(“Accepting” a sentence is supposed to be a psychological notion (pp. 94–6), rather than
a recognizable form of actual social behavior; this is another departure from Wittgenstein and from Brandom.) Compositionality is brieﬂy addressed in Chapter 7: A complex
expression’s meaning property consists in a “construction property,” e.g.: x means
DOGS BARK in that “x results from putting terms whose meanings are DOG and
BARK, in that order, into a schema whose meaning is NS V” (p. 156). But, unless I have
missed it, nothing is said as to how the “schema” is supposed to have a “use regularity”
despite not being an expression of English.

Further Reading
•

The literature on Wittgenstein is so vast that I hesitate to mention one or two
or three exegetical works to the exclusion of others. But: Rhees (1959–60),
Pitcher (1964: ch. 11), Hallett (1967), Kenny (1973: chs. 7–9).

