5 Logical Consequence via Models

What is logic about? One common answer is that it is the science of good reasoning.
This is too broad: there is more to reasoning well than being logical. Narrowing
down a bit, we might say that logic is the science that tells us what follows from
what. Its topic is the relation of logical consequence.1
But what is this relation? What do we mean, exactly, when we say that a
sentence follows logically from some others (or equivalently, that an argument is
logically valid)?
5.1 Informal characterizations of consequence

Of course, you’ve learned a technical definition of logical consequence, as preservation of truth in all models (§1.1.2). But it makes sense to ask for an informal
characterization of the concept that this technical definition is trying to capture.
After all, logicians were concerned with the systematization of valid arguments
long before the concept of a model was articulated, and thus long before we could
define logical consequence as preservation of truth in all models.
Historically, there have been three main approaches to characterizing consequence. We will consider them in turn, before turning to Tarski’s classic article on
the concept of logical consequence, which motivates and articulates the currently
dominant model-theoretic conception.
5.1.1 In terms of necessity

Valid arguments are supposed to be truth-preserving: nothing untrue can be a
logical consequence of true premises. Thus logical consequence would seem to
involve at least
1

Of course, logic also concerns itself with a number of other properties and relations: for example,
validity, logical truth, logical equivalence, logical independence, consistency, and provability. But all
of these have a close definitional or normative connection with logical consequence. (For example, 𝑝
is logically independent of 𝑞 and 𝑟 if neither 𝑝 nor ⌜¬𝑝⌝ is a logical consequence of 𝑞 and 𝑟; and in a
properly constructed proof system, only logical consequences of the premises should be provable.) So
it is not unreasonable to think of logic as the science of logical consequence.

