Frege on Predication
But if we make the substitution, the result does not make sense, let alone
preserve truth value:
(14) Silver Blaze the concept horse.
The objection concludes that what has gone wrong is that we have assumed
that ‘the concept horse’ refers to a concept. Frege is fully aware of this line of
argument and comments that:
the behaviour of the concept is essentially predicative, even where
something is being asserted about it; consequently it can be replaced there
only by another concept, never by an object. (Frege 1891, p. 50)

What this means is that, because ‘ is a horse’ and ‘the concept horse’ cannot
be substituted for one another in sentences without change of truth value,
Frege himself claims that ‘the references of the two expressions are essentially
different’ (Frege 1891, p. 50).
We will not assess this line of argument here. We will encounter another
line of argument in Chapter 3 §3 which relies on the assumption that coreferring expressions can be substituted for each other in sentences without
change of truth value, and we will address that assumption there. (Wiggins
1984; MacBride 2011 address the line of argument concerning predicates such
as ‘ is a horse’ and noun phrases such as ‘the concept horse’.) Here we will
concentrate on some responses to the paradox of the concept horse.
The paradox is significant because Frege wants to say various things about
concepts (such as that they are incomplete, that they are referred to by
predicates and so on) and yet he cannot do so on pain of paradox. In ‘On
Concept and Object’, he tries to resolve matters:
It must indeed be recognized that here we are confronted by an awkwardness
of language, which I admit cannot be avoided, if we say that the concept
horse is not a concept, [footnote omitted] whereas, e.g., the city of Berlin is a
city and the volcano Vesuvius is a volcano. Language is here in a predicament
that justifies the departure from custom. The peculiarity of our case is indicated
by Kerry himself, by means of the quotation-marks around ‘horse’; I use italics
to the same end. There was no reason to mark out the words ‘Berlin’ and
‘Vesuvius’ in a similar way. In logical discussions one quite often needs to
assert something about a concept, and to express this in the form usual for
such assertions, viz., to make what is asserted of the concept into the content
of the grammatical predicate. Consequently, one would expect that the
reference of the grammatical subject would be the concept; but the concept

49

