On Philosophical Style∗
Brand Blanshard
1953

Lord Macaulay once recorded in his diary a memorable attempt—his first and apparently
also his last—to read Kant’s Critique: “I received today a translation of Kant . . . . I tried
to read it, but found it utterly unintel-ligible, just as if it had been written in San-scrit. Not
one word of it gave me anything like an idea except a Latin quotation from Persius. It seems
to me that it ought to be possible to explain a true theory of metaphysics in words that I
can understand. I can understand Locke, and Berkeley, and Hume, and Reid, and Stewart.
I can understand Cicero’s Acade-mics, and most of Plato; and it seems odd that in a book
on the elements of metaphysics . . . I should not be able to comprehend a word.”
What sort of writing was it that Macaulay was called upon to read? I quote a single fairly
typical sentence: “Because a certain form of sensuous intuition exists in the mind a priori
which rests on the receptivity of the representative faculty (sensibility), the under-standing,
as a spontaneity, is able to deter-mine the internal sense by means of the diver-sity of given
representations, conformably to the synthetical unity of the apperception of the manifold
of sensuous intuition a priori, as the condition to which must necessarily be submitted all
objects of human intuition.”
In a recent book Hans Reichenbach records a similar adventure with his illustrious countryman, Hegel. He picked up Hegel’s Philoso-phy of History and, before getting past the
introduction, read the following: “Reason is substance, as well as infinite power, its own
infinite material underlying all the natural and spiritual life; as also the infinite form which
sets the material in motion. Reason is the substance from which all things derive their being.”
Now, says Reichenbach, “the term ‘reason,’ as generally used, means an abstract capacity of
human beings, or to be modest, in parts of the behaviour. Does the philosopher quoted wish
to say that our bodies are made of an abstract capacity of themselves? Even a philosopher
∗

Adamson Lecture, Manchester University

1

