M axwel l ■ O n t o l o c i c a l S t at us of T h e o r e t i c a l E nti ti e s

compound microscope. His crobes were “observed” in great detail, and it
became possible to identify the specific kind of m icrobe (for so they began
to be called) which was responsible for each different disease. Some phi­
losophers freely admitted error and were converted to realist positions
concerning theories. Others resorted to subjective idealism or to a thor­
oughgoing phenomenalism, of which there were two principal varieties.
According to one, the one "legitimate” observation language had for its
descriptive terms only those which referred to sense data. The other main­
tained the stronger thesis that all “factual” statements were translatable
without remainder into the sense-datum language. In either case, any two
non-sense data (e.g., a theoretical entity and what would ordinarily be
called an “observable physical object”) had virtually the same status. Oth­
ers contrived means of modifying their views much less drastically. One
group maintained that Jones’ crobes actually never had been unobservable
in principle, for, they said, the theory did not imply the impossibility of
finding a means (e.g., the microscope) of observing them. A more radical
contention was that the crobes were not observed at all; it was argued that
what was seen by means of the microscope was just a shadow or an image
rather than a corporeal organism.

■

|

The Observational-Theoretical Dichotomy

Let us turn from these fictional philosophical positions and consider some
of the actual ones to which they roughly correspond. Taking the last one
first, it is interesting to note the following passage from Bergmann: “But
it is only fair to point out that if this. . . methodological and terminological
analysis [for the thesis that there are no atoms] . . . is strictly adhered to,
even stars and microscopic objects are not physical things in a literal sense,
but merely by courtesy of language and pictorial imagination. This might
seem awkward. But when I look through a microscope, all I see is a patch
of color which creeps through the field like a shadow over a wall. And a
shadow, though real, is certainly not a physical thing.”4
I should like to point out that it is also the case that if this analysis is
strictly adhered to, we cannot observe physical things through opera
glasses, or even through ordinary spectacles, and one begins to wonder
about the status of what we see through an ordinary windowpane. And
what about distortions due to temperature gradients—however small and,
thus, always present—in the ambient air? It really does “seem awkward”
to say that when people who wear glasses describe what the}’ see they are
talking about shadows, while those who employ unaided vision talk about
physical things—or that when we look through a windowpane, we can
only infer that it is raining, while if we raise the window, we may “observe
directly” that it is. The point I am making is that there is, in principle, a

