Roman Frigg

Let us begin with interpretative models. Overarching mathematical theories like classical
mechanics appear to provide general descriptions of a wide range of objects that fall within
their scope. However, on closer inspection, it turns out that these theories do not apply to
the world directly. The reason for this is that they employ abstract terms, i.e. terms that
apply to a target system only if a description couched in more concrete terms also applies
to the target. Cartwright offers the following two conditions for a concept to be abstract
relative to another concept:
First, a concept that is abstract relative to another more concrete set of descriptions
never applies unless one of the more concrete descriptions also applies. These are the
descriptions that can be used to “fit out” the abstract description on any given occa‑
sion. Second, satisfying the associated concrete description that applies on a particu‑
lar occasion is what satisfying the abstract description consists in on that occasion.
(1999b, 39)
She offers the example of work. Having responded to an email, having revised a section of
a paper, and having attended a meeting is what my having done work this morning consists
in. If I tell a friend over lunch what I have done and he responds, “well, you’ve responded
to an email, revised a section, and attended a meeting, but when did you work?”, he either
does not understand the concept of work or, more likely, is joking with me.
Cartwright submits that important concepts that appear in mathematised theories are
abstract in the same way as work. The concept of force, for instance, is abstract in that it
applies only if a more concrete concept also applies. There is no such thing as “nothing but
a force” acting on a body. There being a force between two bodies on a particular occa‑
sion consists in them gravitationally attracting each other, or electrostatically repelling each
other, or … These more concrete claims fit out the abstract claim of there being a force.
Force, therefore, is an abstract property and “Newton’s law tells that whatever has this
property has another, namely having a mass and an acceleration which, when multiplied
together, give the […] numerical value, F” (1999b, 43). Force, therefore, has no independ‑
ent existence; it exists only in its more specific forms like gravity, electrostatics, and so on.
Specifying what concrete claims fit out abstract claims amounts to specifying an interpreta‑
tive model. An interpretative model then consists of the “actors” that fit out the abstract
claims of the theory.
Let us now turn to representative models. Cartwright regards representative models as
ones that are built to “represent real arrangements and affairs that take place in the world”
(1999b, 180). These models have two crucial features. The first is that they are highly ide‑
alised. Constructing a representative model involves twisting and distorting the properties
of the target in many ways and the result of this process is in no way a mirror image of the
target. Indeed, Cartwright notes that “it is not essential that the models accurately describe
everything that actually happens; and in general it will not be possible for them to do so”
(1983, 140). Second, all these distortions notwithstanding, the model still is a representa‑
tion of the target, albeit one that is inaccurate in certain respects. The principles of the
theory therefore apply to “highly fictionalized objects” (1983, 136) in the representational
model. So, one has to distort reality to force it into the corset of the theory: “our prepared
descriptions lie” because “in general we will have to distort the true picture of what hap‑
pens if we want to fit it into the highly constrained structures of our mathematical theories”
(139). Without these distortions, the theory would be inapplicable.
34

