Chapter Eight

A second form of explanation for altruism was developed
in the 1960s by William Hamilton (1964, 1975), explanations
in terms of “inclusive fitness” or “kin selection.” An organism
can be altruistic as an individual but still behave in a way that
benefits the genes it carries if its generosity is directed at its biological relatives—­individuals who are likely to carry the same
genes, including the gene for altruistic behavior itself. A third
approach is based on reciprocity (Trivers 1971). An organism can
gain a long-­term benefit by making short-­term sacrifices, so long
as the favors are likely to be repaid. This third framework does
not use the idea of benefits to groups, and does not require that
the interacting individuals be related—­t hey might even be from
different species.
An influential framework for modeling these issues, especially
suited to reciprocity but with more general applications, is evolutionary game theory (see also §2.3). The Prisoner’s Dilemma has
become a focal model for the problem of cooperation. The original scenario does not map very naturally to biological cases, but
here it is. You and a fellow gang member are separately interrogated by the police. If you inform on your accomplice and he does
not inform on you, you will be set free and he given a long sentence. If neither informs, there is a very short sentence for both
of you. If he informs and you do not, you are the one who gets
the long sentence. If both inform, you receive a short sentence,
but longer than the one you’d get if neither of you had talked.
You make your decision knowing that your accomplice has the
same choice as you, faced simultaneously, and neither party can
influence the other. This is a symmetrical two-­player game. In the
matrix below, the payoffs are those for the row player, “Player 1,”
conditional on what the other player does. “C” stands for cooperation and “D” for defect, where “cooperation” is with the other
player, not the police.
Player 2
C
122

Player 1

D

C

R=3

S=1

D

T=4

P=2

