Philosophy and Science

9

epistemological question of whether and how we can know anything about these
atoms. Locke held that unobservable atoms and combinations of them caused
our experiences and that some of the features of our experience resemble the
properties of these atoms and the things made of them. The ones that Locke
believed resemble the features of the objects—​collections of corpuscles that cause
our experiences—​just happen to be the ones that seventeenth-​century physics
invoked: size, shape, matter. By contrast, Locke held that features of our experience like color, smell, taste, and texture were subjective properties of our experience
that did not resemble the real properties of things that caused these experiences.
Of course Locke did not appeal to physics in arguing for this claim. He thought he
had deeper philosophical arguments for why our experiences represented reality
at least in some of their features. Whence came the name for Locke’s epistemology, “representative realism.”
Few scientists and philosophers were satisfied with Locke’s theory since there
was no way to compare our experiences to their causes in order to determine
whether the former resembled the latter. In fact, they held, Locke’s solution to
the problem of how we can have scientific knowledge about the world beyond
our immediate observations simply encouraged skepticism about the claims of
science. The general dissatisfaction with Locke’s view sent philosophers and
scientists in two different directions for their epistemologies, theories of the
nature, extent, and justification of knowledge: empiricism and rationalism.
These two theories of knowledge will come up repeatedly in this book, so it is
worth briefly explaining them and their differences. The original debate between
these two epistemologies was about whether we had innate knowledge about
the world and its nature. Descartes championed innateness. Locke repudiated
it. The dispute about innateness seems to be a psychological one: is some of the
knowledge everyone grants that people have somehow already inside their heads,
known before birth, or is it all learned after birth by a mind that comes into the
world as a blank slate, a tabula rasa? Following Descartes, rationalists in psychology and philosophy held the former view, empiricists the latter.
Over time, at least among philosophers, this disagreement moved from being
a disagreement about the causes of our beliefs and knowledge to a dispute about
the grounds or justification of knowledge. Empiricists held that all beliefs about
the nature of things are justified by experience, observation, the collection of
data, and the contrivance of experiments. Rationalists held that at least some
beliefs, usually the most important, general, and fundamental ones in science,
are justified by “pure reason” alone, and cannot be grounded on experience. Such
beliefs are known to be true by the dint of the mind’s employment of its own
unaided powers of (presumably logical) thought. Notice the asymmetry here,
which will continue to be important. Empiricists hold that anything we know
about the world requires justification by experience. Rationalists by and large
agree that most of what we know does require justification by experience. Theirs
is not the contrary thesis that everything we know is justified without experience. Rather, they hold that in addition to a lot of knowledge that is justified by

