Modality, entailment and quantification

119

The conclusion is one that a relevant logician should find a little unpleasant.
But things get worse. The following argument is also valid in our intended
model:
1. cicero = cieeror,)
hyp
tully = cicerol,l
1, truth condition for =
tully = tullyl,l
2, truth condition for =
4. cicero = cicero --* tully = tullye 1 - 3, -* I
2.
3.

This conclusion seems quite irrelevant.
Some philosophers, however, might tell us to accept this conclusion. A direct
reference theorist, for example, might tell us that `cicero = cicero -+ tully =
tully' is quite acceptable. On a standard version of the theory of direct reference,
sentences express structured propositions. For example, the sentence `Ramsey
is a dog' expresses the structured proposition (Dog, ramsey), where `Dog' refers
to the property of being a dog and `ramsey' refers to my dog. On the theory of
direct reference, a proper name contributes only its referent to the structured
proposition expressed by the sentence. This is to be contrasted with a definite
description which contributes the properties used to describe the object. Since

the referent of 'Cicero' and 'Tully' are the same, the structured proposition
expressed `cicero = cicero' is (=, cicero, cicero) and the proposition expressed
by 'tully = tully' is (=, cicero, cicero). Thus, a direct reference theorist could
well say that the implication at step 4 of the above proof is quite relevant, that
is, it is merely a self-implication.
On the other hand, we can modify our semantics slightly in a way that is in
accord with the theory of direct reference that avoids commitment to these sorts
of seemingly irrelevant implications. On Kaplan's theory of direct reference,
in addition to its content, an expression has a character. To understand what
a character is, we first have to understand the distinction between contexts of
utterance and contexts of evaluation. A context of utterance is merely a context
(in our theory, a situation) in which an expression is said, written, signed, or
whatever. The context of utterance determines the referents of the expressions
used in an utterance. For example, I yelled `Ramsey stop barking!' just before
writing this sentence. My use of `Ramsey' refers to my dog. Suppose at the
very same time the philosopher Hugh Mellor in Cambridge said `Ramsey was
a great philosopher'. He is not referring to my dog, but to a human being, Frank
Ramsey. The context of evaluation, on the other hand, is a situation in which
we determine whether a statement is true or false. Suppose for example, that I
say `Ramsey could have been an obedience champion' we first use the context
of utterance to determine that the referent of `Ramsey' is my dog. In so doing
we determine the structured proposition (Obedience Champion, ramsey). We
then evaluate this proposition at all situations accessible to the present one to

