162

Theory Construction vs. Model Building

blind variation and natural selection, along with its twentieth-​century extensions
(which explain heredity and variation in purely physical and chemical terms),
represents a vindication of the scientific program of mechanism that began with
Newton. It shows that the purely mechanical vision of nature associated with
Newton’s theory can be extended all the way through the life sciences, leaving no
room for a teleological or purposive view of any part of nature.
Notice that, like other sets of laws, the theory of natural selection makes a
number of hypothetical claims: If there is variation in heritable traits and if these
variants differ in fitness, then there will be adaptational change. Like the kinetic
theory of gases that tells us how gases behave, if they exist, without telling us
that there are gases, Darwin’s general theory does not assert that adaptational
evolution obtains. For that conclusion we need initial conditions: the assertion
that some things reproduce, that their offspring’s traits are inherited from their
parents, and that these traits are not always exact copies, but do in fact vary from
parent to offspring and among offspring. On the Origin of Species of course
made such assertions about lineages of the many plants and animals Darwin
had been studying for 30 years by the time it was published in 1859. Like most
other works of biology it describes a great deal about evolution on this particular planet, along with a general theory about evolution that could be realized
by things elsewhere in the universe that look nothing like what we recognize as
animals and plants, just so long as they show heritable variations in fitness to
their environments.
Another thing to notice about Darwin’s theory is that while evolution by
natural selection requires reproduction with heritable variation, it is silent on
how reproduction takes place, and tells us nothing about the mechanism of
heredity. It presupposes that there is a mechanism of heredity, but it is silent
on genetics, which is the mechanism of hereditary transmission on Earth.
And of course, it must also be silent on the source of the variations that
are continually being manifested from generation to generation, and among
which the environment “selects” by filtering the less fit. Much twentieth-​
century biology has been devoted to providing the theory of how hereditary
variation occurs on Earth that is required to apply Darwin’s theory of natural
selection in detail to explain the direction and rate of evolution on this planet
over the last 3.5 billion years. This theory is of course molecular and population genetics.

Models and Theories in Evolutionary Biology
Unlike Newton, Darwin did not identify the central features of his theory
as laws, nor did he express the process of blind variation and environmental
filtration he discovered in a set of universal generalizations. He employed the
word “laws” often enough in On the Origin of Species but not to refer to the
mode of operation of the forces of evolutionary adaptation he discovered.
Moreover, there are a number of other ways of stating or expressing his

