Philosophy of Developmental Biology

61

organization of a developmental system without affecting normal cytodifferentiation mechanisms” (1975: 169). This concept was widely adopted, and
different types of selector genes are recognized today: ﬁeld-, region-, celltype, tissue- and compartment-speciﬁc (Mann and Carroll, 2002). As their
name suggests, these genes select in some deﬁned area of the embryo which
other genes are activated. Their effect is that one among several different
developmental pathways is selected. All selector genes are transcription factors
that directly bind to DNA, often together with several cofactors, to regulate the
expression of nearby target genes. Gradient-forming morphogens (see
Section 3) determine what selector genes are activated when and where in the
embryo. In contrast to the morphogens, selector genes act cell-autonomously,
which means that they only have an effect on cells which express them (see
Section 4.1). Thus, selector genes are parts of intricate networks of transcription
factors that are said to “interpret” the positional information provided by
morphogen gradients.
While the concept of selector genes came from classical genetic research on
wing development in Drosophila, several other classes of genes were eventually
admitted to the category of selector genes. I shall brieﬂy discuss two examples:
the Hox genes, a class of region-speciﬁc selector genes, and eyeless/Pax6,
a ﬁeld-speciﬁc selector gene. Hox genes are involved in patterning the embryo
along the anteroposterior axis. They determine the identity of each one of the
segments on an insect embryo (see Box 3).
It has not been easy to identify the genes on which the Hox genes act. As
usual, the best understood systems are found in Drosophila. For example,
Lovegrove et al. (2006) have studied the coordinated control of several target
genes of the Hox-gene Abdominal-B during development of the respiratory
organ of the larva, known as the spiracle. Abd-B (see Box 3) speciﬁes the
identity (i.e., normal development) of the last ﬁve posterior segments of the
ﬂy. According to the study by Lovegrove et al., Abd-A ﬁrst activates a layer of
four regulator genes, each of which regulates the activity of a set of realizator
genes belonging to three functional groups, namely genes encoding cell
adhesion proteins (molecules that make speciﬁc cells stick together), cell
polarity genes (encoding proteins differentiating the cell membrane into
a side facing the surface and one facing the interior of the tissue), and proteins
regulating cytoskeleton formation (cytoskeleton: intracellular protein ﬁbers
that give the cell stability as well as allowing cell movements). Abd-B and the
four regulatory genes thus coordinate the activities of these genes, determining the cells to form speciﬁc structures such as the spiracles. Figure 6 shows
coordinated control of gene expression by the Hox gene Abdominal-B in the
fruit ﬂy.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 201.141.17.62, on 16 Mar 2022 at 22:01:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108954181

