Frege on Sentences
sentence to determine the sentence’s sense. But we should notice that Frege’s
claim that the sense of a sentence determines its truth condition suggests a
different direction of explanation. According to this, the sense of a sentence
determines the sentence’s truth condition, and the senses of the component
expressions consist in their contribution to fixing the truth conditions of the
sentences in which they figure (Frege 1893, paragraph 32).
Lastly, (Q10) asked whether there can be a systematic philosophical study
of natural language. Frege regarded natural language as defective because it
contains expressions that are ambiguous or that are vague, as well as empty
names and sentences that lack truth value. For the purposes of mathematics
and science, Frege advocated replacing flawed natural languages with an
artificial language free of those deficiencies and which makes more evident the
logical relations between Fregean thoughts.

Questions for discussion
Question 1
Fregeans claim that the primary bearer of meaning is the sentence. They take
this to be a lesson of Frege’s context principle: the principle that words have
meaning only in the context of a sentence (Frege 1884, p. x). Fregeans also
claim that the sense of a sentence is determined by the senses of its constituent
expressions (plus the sentence’s syntax). Are those claims compatible?
Question 2
Fregeans claim that the sense of a sentence is determined by the senses of its
constituent expressions (plus the sentence’s syntax). They further claim that
the sense of every such expression is determined by its contribution to the
senses of the sentences in which it figures. Are those claims compatible?
Question 3
If someone claimed that all true sentences refer to the same state of affairs,
would their view differ substantially from Frege’s view that all true sentences
refer to the True? Or would their claim be using different terminology to say
the same thing as Frege?
Question 4
Some philosophers, such as Dummett, find Frege’s talk of indirect sense
obscure. It has been replied that such talk is no more obscure than talk of

85

