52

Relevant logic and its semantics

3.8

A part-whole relation on situations

One situation might be part of another situation. For example, the situations that
just contains all the information that is present in my study while I am writing
this sentence is contained in the situation t that contains all the information
present in Wellington while I write this sentence. The persistence relation that
we discussed in chapter 2 above is a part-whole relation on situations. Thus, if

s a t we can say that s is part oft.
3.9

The place of theorems in a universe of situations

As we saw in section 2.8 above, a formula is valid in a model in the RoutleyMeyer semantics if and only if that formula is true in every logical situation
of that model. In section 2.8 we saw that the logical situations have a rather
neat relationship to the valid inferences that have only one premise. That is,
according to the semantic entailment theorem, if it is valid in a model to infer
from `A' to `B', then `A -+ B' is valid in that model. As we saw in section 2.10,
this relationship extends very nicely to inferences with more than one premise.
I am not going to claim any deep philosophical motivation for the distinction
between logical and non-logical situations. Rather I appeal to the elegance of
this relationship between logical and non-logical situations as a reason to accept
this aspect of the model theory. In scientific investigations elegance counts as a
virtue of a theory. I think that the same should be said of semantical theories. All
things being equal, we should accept the more elegant semantical theory. Thus,
the elegance of the relationship between valid inference, valid formulae, and
logical situations gives us some justification to accept the current semantical
theory.

3.10

Non-normal situations

Very few of the situations in our model are logical situations. The other situations
are, in the parlance of modal logic, non-normal situations. That is, a non-normal
situation is a situation in which some or all of the laws of logic fail. The concept

of a non-normal situation is due to Kripke who uses non-normal worlds in his
semantics for non-normal modal logics (Kripke 1965b).
There are, however, interesting differences between Kripke's non-normal
worlds and Routley and Meyer's non-normal situations. In Kripke's semantics,
the truth conditions for the modal operators at non-normal worlds are not the
same as their truth conditions at normal worlds. If, as we have assumed, these
truth conditions at least in part constitute the meaning of these operators, then
on Kripke's semantics the meanings of the modal operators are not the same at

