110

Theories of Meaning

The Big One
Objection 7
Following Pierre Duhem (1906/1954), W. V. Quine (1953, 1960) argues that no
individual sentence has a distinctive veriﬁcation condition, except relative to a
mass of background theory against which “observational” testing takes place. This
will take some explaining.
There is a naive idea that many people have about science. It is that one puts forward
a scientiﬁc hypothesis and then tests the hypothesis by doing an experiment, and the
experiment shows, all by itself, whether the hypothesis is correct. Duhem pointed out
that in the history of the universe there has never been an experiment that could
singlehandedly verify or falsify a hypothesis. The reason is that there are always too
many auxiliary assumptions that have to be made to bring the hypothesis into contact
with the experimental apparatus. Hypotheses do sometimes get disconﬁrmed, outright
refuted if you like, but only because the scientists involved are holding certain other
assumptions ﬁxed, assumptions that are disputable and may even be quite wrong.
Suppose we are doing an astronomical study, and we are verifying and refuting things
by making observations through complicated telescopes. In using such telescopes, the
astronomers are assuming virtually all of optical theory, and countless other things
besides.
Surprisingly, Duhem’s point holds in everyday life as well. Take any good ordinary
sentence about a physical object, such as “There is a chair at the head of the table.”
What is its veriﬁcation condition? A ﬁrst thing to notice is that “the” set of experiences
that would conﬁrm that sentence is in a way conditional, on one’s hypothetical vantage
point. We might try something like this: If you walk into the room from the direction of
this door here, you will have an experience as of a chair at the head of the table. But
even that depends. It depends on whether you have your eyes open, and it depends on
whether your sensory apparatus is functioning properly, and it depends on whether the
lights are on, and . . .. These qualiﬁcations do not foreseeably come to an end. If we try
to build in the appropriate hedges (“If you walk into the room, and you have your eyes
open, and your sensory apparatus is functioning, . . .”), more qualiﬁcations crop up:
Are you walking forward rather than backing into the room? Has something been
interposed between you and the chair? Has the chair been camouﬂaged? Has it been
rendered invisible by Martians? Has your brain been altered by a freakish burst of
Q-radiation from the sky? We can go on like this for days.
The moral is that what we take to be “the” veriﬁcation condition for a given
empirical statement presupposes a massive background of default auxiliary assumptions. Those assumptions are usually perfectly reasonable, and it is no accident that
we make them. But a particular “veriﬁcation condition” is associated with a given
sentence only if we choose to rely on such assumptions, almost any of which may
fail. Intrinsically, the sentence has no determinate veriﬁcation condition.
That is (to say the least) an embarrassment for a theory that identiﬁes a
sentence’s meaning with that sentence’s veriﬁcation condition. But as we shall
now see, the matter does not quite end here.

