OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 25/5/2022, SPi

 ’     ’   

231

coherent; and this remains in grave doubt, And yet, it is hard to see how it can be
abandoned, so strong is the motivation for it. The alternative is an apprehension
of objects, including abstract objects, underlying, but anterior to, an understanding of reference to them, or, indeed, a grasp of thoughts about them: and this is a
form of external realism too coarse to be entertained. I am therefore forced to
conclude without either endorsing the central feature of Frege’s philosophy or
rejecting it; I can do no more than to say lamely that the issue is one of whose
resolution is of prime importance to philosophy. (Dummett (1995), p. 19)

One is left with the impression that even if a practicable reformulation of the
context principle were to become available, together with a non-circular way of
circumscribing the domain of the quantiﬁers, Frege’s claim to have secured the
existence of numbers by purely logical means would not be vindicated. What
stands in the way of such vindication is that only a robust notion of the reference
could secure this result:
To justify a realist interpretation of a given theory, even if it be an internal version
of realism, it is not enough that we should be entitled to ascribe a reference to the
terms of that theory; the notion of reference, as so ascribed, must be sufﬁciently
robust to bear the weight of a realist interpretation. This surely requires that the
notion of reference should play a genuine role within the semantic theory; that is,
that determining the reference of a term should be a step in determining the
truth-value of a sentence containing it. But, if the referentiality of the term was
justiﬁed by appeal to the context principle, its reference is semantically idle, since
it was secured by specifying the truth-value of sentences of which the term is part,
or the reference of more complex terms of which the term is part, by some means
not involving the identiﬁcation of the referent. (Dummett (1995), p. 18)

Here, I have touched on a host of difﬁcult issues. What I would like to explore in
what follows is the contrast between a thin and a robust notion of reference, on the
one hand, and between an idle and an operative conception of that notion, on the
other. Is the contrast between idle and operative only a different formulation of the
contrast between thin and robust? I seem to detect a difference. And even if it is
not there, I suggest that we make it up.
My positive suggestion is that only a notion of reference governed by the
principle of compositionality counts as robust, and can satisfy GGA’s demands.
The principle of compositionality can be construed in many different ways (cf. e.g.
Linnebo 2009). Linnebo’s construal, for all I can judge, is appropriate to GGA,
where the guidelines of a compositional semantics are laid down. As far as GLA is
concerned, however, things are not so clear-cut. My proposal is that we adopt the
compositional reading of the context principle suggested by Dummett in
chapter 16 of Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics (= FPM), and discussed more

