OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 25/5/2022, SPi

      

43

proposition and idea in itself [Sätze und Vorstellungen an sich] I have at most
only accepted a tenable doctrine by Bolzano. Likewise, I am aware that . . . even
with the best intentions in the world it may happen that someone does not know
all of their predecessors in some way (VIII, 135f., n.).

However, such blunt remarks of Kerry’s would not have found favour either with
the Neo-Kantians in Strasbourg or with Brentano’s pupils in Vienna. Considering
that neither Brentano nor Marty took notice of Bolzano, it is hardly surprising
that Frege also ignored him. Nevertheless, a detail in Kerry’s article may arouse the
reader’s curiosity. In the passage in question (VIII, 129) Kerry mentions a
statement by Bolzano in his anonymously published Wissenschaftslehre und
Religionsphilosophie in einer beurtheilenden Übersicht (p. 26). In that passage
Bolzano says that the contrast between ‘truths in themselves’, on the one hand,
and ‘thought’ or ‘known propositions’, on the other, is apparent in contexts where
one asks whether every truth in itself is known by someone or whether every
proposition in itself (including false ones) is thought or presented by someone,
that is in contexts where one realizes that
through classes in geometry it is rather the thought or knowledge of the
Pythagorean theorem that is reproduced [vervielfältigt] in our minds, not the
Pythagorean theorem [Satz] in itself. Or, after all, also when we say: “If there were
not a single rational being, the proposition that there is not a single rational being
would be itself a truth.”

Of course, we cannot rule out that Frege’s use of the example of the Pythagorean
theorem in his ﬁrst Logical Investigation (‘Der Gedanke’) to elucidate the difference between subjective idea [Vorstellung] and objective content [Inhalt] is
merely accidental. The terminology employed by Frege is different from that of
Bolzano: his use of ‘thought’ [Gedanke] corresponds to Bolzano’s ‘proposition
in itself ’ [Satz an sich], whereas Frege’s ‘idea’ [Vorstellung] is equivalent to
Bolzano’s ‘thought proposition’ [gedachter Satz]. Here is what Frege says in ‘Der
Gedanke’:
Is thought an idea? If other people can assent to the thought I express in the
Pythagorean theorem just as I do, then it does not belong to the content of my
consciousness, I am not its owner; yet, I can nevertheless acknowledge it as true.
However, if what is taken to be the content of the Pythagorean theorem by me
and by somebody else is not the same thought at all, we should not really say ‘the
Pythagorean theorem’, but ‘my Pythagorean theorem’, ‘his Pythagorean theorem’, and these would be different, for the sense necessarily goes with the
sentence. . . . Could the sense of my Pythagorean theorem be true and the sense
of his false? (Der Gedanke, p. 68; Eng. tr. M. Beaney)

