War

Walzer’s metaphor of criminality is important, for it underlines an
implicit assumption in the traditional account of just cause. Aggression is
understood, not merely as an assault on the particular states attacked, but
as a challenge to a broader norm of international order, according to which
all states deserve equal respect as independent sovereign powers. As Vattel,
the great eighteenth-century theorist of international law, has it:
A dwarf is as much a man as a giant: a small Republic is no less a sovereign
state than the most powerful kingdom.
By a necessary consequence of that equality, whatever is lawful for one
nation, is equally lawful for any other, and whatever is unjustifiable in the
one, is equally so in the other.
A nation then is mistress of her own actions . . . If she makes an ill use of
her liberty, she is guilty of a breach of duty; but other nations are bound
to acquiesce in her conduct, since they have no right to dictate to her.
Since nations are free, independent, and equal

and since each possesses

the right of judging, according to the dictates of her conscience, what conduct
she is to pursue in order to fulfil her duties; the effect of the whole is, to
produce, at least externally and in the eyes of mankind, a perfect equality
of rights between nations, in the administration of their affairs and the
pursuit of their pretensions, without regard to the intrinsic justice of
their conduct, of which others have no right to form a definitive
judgment; so that whatever may be done by any one nation, may be done
by any other.8

So, for Vattel, states cannot forcibly intervene in each other’s affairs
‘‘without violating the liberty of some particular state and destroying the
foundations of their natural society.’’9
Walzer’s understanding of the ‘‘crime of aggression’’ moves in close orbit
around this statist conception of global politics. There already exists, he and
others maintain, a discernible vision of justice ordering the community of
nations, assigning responsibility for the internal affairs of nations to the
separate states that govern them, and imposing on them a corresponding
duty of mutual forbearance. On this view, aggressive transgressions of these
responsibility-defining boundaries provide just cause for war.

8

Vattel (1844), pp. lxiii.

9

Vattel (1844), pp. lxiii.

231

