THE DISTRIBUTIO N OF PROPERTY

141

the amount that could be provided by a plot of the same size under cultivation.
Locke suggests that the cultivated plot will be perhaps a hundred times as
productive. From this Locke concludes that 'labour . . . puts the difference of
value on every thing' (Second Treatise, s. 40, p. 296). In other words, in
labouring on land one massively increases its value. This is why labouring
entitles the labourer to appropriate cultivated land.
But this argument too has an obvious difficulty. We might be persuaded that
labouring entitles you to keep the added value. But the land is not part of the
added value: it was there before you came, and, in normal circumstances, would
still have been there had you never laboured. So this is an argument, at best, for
keeping the fruits of production. It seems to give no right to keep the land
worked on. Is there anything that could yield that consequence?
A fourth argument might help. Locke says that God gave the earth to the use
of the:
Industrious and Rational. . . not to the Fancy and Covetousness of the
Quarrelsom and Contentious. He that had as good left for his Improvement,
as was already taken up, needed not complain, ought not to meddle with what
was already improved by another's Labour: If he did, 'tis plain he desired the
benefit of another's Pains, which he had no right to, and not the Ground
which God had given him in common with others to labour on. (Second
Treatise, s. 34, p. 291)
In this passage Locke wants us to consider someone who has appropriated and
improved land (Industrious) and another person (Quarrelsom) who makes a
claim for the land Industrious has worked on. Provided that there is plenty of
land left, Quarrelsom's only reason for wanting Industrious's land is laziness:
not being prepared to put in the work that Industrious has. But this is no good
reason, and so no good reason to complain about Industrious's appropriation.
Behind this, I suggest, is an implicit appeal to the notion of desert. If Industrious
has worked hard, she deserves the fruits of her labour. At least no one else has a
valid claim.
Unfortunately this argument shares the defects of the earlier ones. The fruits
of labour may be deserved, but the land would have been there anyway. Perhaps
the argument justifies a temporary title to the land—it is yours to use for as long
as you are making good use of it, but for no

