Contemporary liberals seek not to replace democracy with justice but rather to determine
constitutional safeguards to protect justice. On this approach, public opinion dictates decisionmaking except where stipulated by the justice-protecting liberal constitution. Nevertheless, there
is a tension between justice and democracy. The more we emphasize democracy, the more we
will have to reconcile ourselves to the possibility of states acting unjustly. The more we constrain
decision making with liberal principles of justice, on the other hand, the less democratic the
system becomes.

Spotlight: Freedom Day
In 1992 white South Africans voted overwhelmingly to end the system of apartheid, under which black South Africans had been
denied the vote. On 27 April 1994 the first election under the new system was held, with Nelson Mandela becoming President.
His party, the African National Congress, had been banned at the previous election and Mandela himself had spent 27 years in
prison for his anti-apartheid activities. Millions of South Africans queued for hours to cast their votes over a three-day election
period, which resulted in just under 20 million votes being counted. 27 April is now celebrated as a public holiday in South
Africa, under the name ‘Freedom Day’.
THE ROLE OF EXPERTISE

The third criticism of democracy can be traced back as far as the work of Plato and Aristotle, and
is found most obviously in conservative critiques of democracy made by Edmund Burke and
Joseph de Maistre. The criticism is that the idea that all people are equally able to govern is false.
So democracy, which is based on this supposed falsehood, leads to injustice, instability and bad
decision-making. The democratic claim that all individual citizens should possess equal power
and that, therefore, the opinions of each and every individual in society should count equally in
collective deliberations about political decisions, is intended as a safeguard against tyranny. But
why shouldn’t the opinions of certain people carry more weight than others in such
deliberations? In virtually any realm of life outside of politics we are happy to entrust decisionmaking power to those who have expertise. We want brain surgery to be carried out only by
people who have been trained in it, and medical research to be conducted by scientists, and
children to be taught by qualified and skilled teachers.
When it comes to the business of politics, however, democracy requires the opposite. In
democratic societies we think that everyone should have an equal right to influence decisions
about state action. Why? It is not as if political matters are straightforward or easy. On the
contrary, states require incredibly complicated and difficult decisions on a range of complex
topics which have national and international implications. Democracy seems to hold that there is
no role for expertise in the realm of politics, but this seems implausible. Who is best placed to
decide whether, for example, Britain should sign up to an EU constitution: a team of professional
politicians who have the time to develop a considered position on the matter, drawing upon the
advice of experts from law, economics, business and so on, or the general public, many of whom
will not have any knowledge of the issues at hand, or any appreciation of the complexities
involved? Similarly, whose views should carry more weight in deliberations about environmental
policy, or education policy, or policing, or the provision of healthcare, or the content of
international trade agreements, or defence spending, or counterterrorism: people who, over the
course of their lives, have developed specialized knowledge in these areas, or people who have
not?

