Imagine there are two people and one cake. Each person is to have a portion of cake, and each
person wants as much as possible for themselves. Only one person can cut the cake. In this
situation, the fairest way of dividing the cake is if one person cuts it and the other person chooses
which of the two slices to have. This way, the person cutting the cake knows that the other
person will choose the biggest slice. It is therefore in the cutter’s interest to cut the cake in half as
fairly as possible, to make the two slices as similar as possible. If the person who cuts the cake
does not know which slice she will get, she will cut the cake fairly. If, on the other hand, she
knows which slice she will have, she will cut the cake unfairly – she will make her slice bigger.
A similar idea is behind Rawls’s veil of ignorance. Because they do not know what sort of
person they will be, the people in the original position will choose principles of justice that
adjudicate fairly between different sorts of people. If you knew that you were going to be an
upper-class atheist, you might choose a system of justice whereby upper-class atheists got more
rights and resources than anyone else. However, if you knew there was a chance you might turn
out to be a working-class Muslim instead, you might well think that things like rights and wealth
should not depend on class or religion, and this would be a fairer outcome.
So, the idea of the veil of ignorance is to deny people knowledge of their particular
circumstances: knowledge that they might use to bias the principles of justice in their favour. If
they did that, the principles would not be fair. So, in order to develop fair principles of justice, it
is necessary that people are ignorant of their particular circumstances.
However, some more requirements are needed if the original position is really to produce fair
principles of justice. Think back to the cake example. Imagine if you were cutting the cake, and
that you knew that your companion were very self-effacing. Although she likes cake very much,
and would like as much cake as possible if she were on her own, her natural kindness and
modesty leads her to put herself after others. So, if you cut the cake unevenly, she will take the
smaller slice. Of course, if you know this, and if you are not troubled by matters of conscience,
you will not cut the cake fairly. Instead, you will cut the cake into one small slice and one much
larger slice, knowing she will take the smaller one. If she is asked to cut first, she will also cut
unfairly, feeling that others are entitled to more than her.
If fairness is to be maintained in this sort of situation, everyone must be self-interested. That is to
say, everyone must think only of their own position, and not of the position of others. So, Rawls
makes this a further condition of the original position: in it, people are self-interested, and they
are also rational. So, people in the original position calculate and prefer what is best for them.
This way, the chosen principles will be fair.
It is very important to note that this does not mean that the principles chosen in the original
position are based on selfishness and individualism, and that is the role of the veil of ignorance.
Imagine we were all in a political philosophy lecture and we were asked, there and then, to agree
on principles of justice to govern the lectures. If we were asked to do so using our self-interested
rationality, each of us would argue selfishly for the principles that would most benefit us as
individuals. Women would argue for principles favouring women, tall people would argue for
principles favouring tall people, and so on. But if we used our self-interested rationality from
behind the veil of ignorance, we would be forced not to be selfish but actually to think through
what it would be like to be each and every person in the lecture. Because we do not know

