INTRODUCTION
We do not say that a man who shows no interest in politics is a man
who minds his own business; we say that he has no business here at
all.
(Pericles' funeral oration, in Thucydides,
The Peloponnesian War, 147)
It has been said that there are only two questions in political philosophy; 'who
gets what?', and 'says who?' Not quite true, but close enough to be a useful
starting-point. The first of these questions is about the distribution of material
goods, and of rights and liberties. On what basis should people possess property?
What rights and liberties should they enjoy? The second question concerns the
distribution of another good: political power. Locke defined political power as
'the right of making laws with penalties of death, and consequently all less
penalties'. This probably goes further than we need, but we can see the point.
Political power includes the right to command others, and to subject them to
punishment if they disobey. Who should hold this power?
As soon as we reflect on these questions puzzles emerge. Is there any good
reason why one person should have more property than another? Are there any
justified limits to my liberty? And what should the relation be between political
power and economic success? In some countries few obtain political power
unless they are already wealthy. In others, those who gain political power soon
find themselves rich. But should there be any connection at all between
possession of wealth and enjoyment of political power?
Indeed, political power is puzzling enough on its own. If someone has
legitimate political power over me then they have the right to force me to do
certain things. But how could another person justify the claim to have such
rights over me? It often seems outrageous that someone else should tell me what
to do, worse still that they think they are entitled to punish me if I disobey. Yet
there is, of course, another side to this. Perhaps I should also consider how
others might behave—how unpleasant

