156

An Introduction to Political Philosophy

central to the public culture of liberal democracy. One thinks, for example,
of the various constitutional checks in force in the United States preventing governments, both State and Federal, from infringing on certain
basic legal rights like the right to free speech. But it is important to
remember that these limits on the legal powers of particular branches
of government are themselves authorized by constitutional law. The rights
enshrined in the American Bill of Rights claim authority as part of the
state’s constitution, but not for any other reason. And, since (like most
constitutions) the American one allows for its own amendment, it is
in principle possible to imagine US law authoritatively repealing the Bill
of Rights. So it is misleading to think of these limits on the powers of
government as having some authority independent of the state; one
cannot therefore cite them as evidence against the assertion that states
claim unlimited authority.
Note, though, that this is not the same as saying that states are in any
sense omnipotent. From the fact that states claim the authority to require
obedience to laws with virtually any content it does not follow that
states must always succeed in actually enforcing these expectations.
For example, when laws strike citizens as deeply morally offensive, they
may rebel, refuse to comply, and eventually thwart the state’s intentions.2
But even so, that would not falsify the state’s claim to be acting within
its authority, any more than the fact that speed limits on motorways
and freeways are routinely ignored tells against the claim that the state
has, and is generally recognized to have, the authority to impose them.
Third, and relatedly, the authority claimed by states is not equivalent
to political power. In claiming authority, that is, states do not claim an
infallible capacity to bring things about by threatening and coercing
people. Indeed, as the earlier example of speed limits illustrates, states
claim authority even when they lack the power to guarantee widespread
compliance.
Authoritative directives purport to differ from exercises of naked coercion or power in that the mere utterance of an instruction by a recognized
authority is supposed to be a sufficient reason for compliance apart
from any threats or other forms of influence. To illustrate, a mugger
exercises power over her victims but neither claims nor has any authority
2

See Atiyah (1995), pp. 84ff.

