Cognitive Projects and the Trustworthiness...

3543

explicit.34 In addition, they argue for the importance of formulating the soundness of
S with global reflection.35
From the results of Sect. 2.2, we have that the theories TS0 and UTS0 investigated
in Fischer et al. (2017) are trustworthy; from Proposition 1 we can correctly infer
that these theories of full disquotational truth in non-classical logic are (internally)
consistent, if the authenticity-condition of soundness is made explicit with global
reflection. On the other hand, many theories of scientific truth in classical logic are
not trustworthy. Fischer et al. claim the following:
Theories of [scientific] truth do not sit well with statements of their own soundness. […] Scientific notions of truth, are inadequate if such a requirement is
adopted. […] In theories of classical truth we cannot consistently hold that what
they prove is true, and not false. This entails that scientific theories of truth suffer the same fate, by our assumption that only theories of classical truth can be
considered theories of scientific truth. (Fischer et al. 2019, pp. 7 - 8)
I agree with Fischer et al. that many theories of scientific truth in classical logic are not
trustworthy. As we saw in Sect. 2.2, theories such as KF are internally inconsistent
with global reflection and therefore not trustworthy by the standards set in Fischer
et al. (2019). There are other theories that are not trustworthy by the same standards:
FS is an an example of such theories.36 It is well-known that FS is incompatible with
global reflection:
Proposition 7 (Horsten et al. 2012, Proposition 4.6) GRP[FS] is inconsistent.37
From these results the following observation follows:
Observation 1 TS0 and UTS0 are trustworthy, whereas KF and FS are not.
The situation looks promising for the proponent of theories of positive truth; the results
of Sect. 3 allow us to make a similar observation:
∗ are trustworthy.
Observation 2 The theories TFB, UTFB and KFpos

Just by the informal understanding of trustworthiness, we can conclude that theories
of full disquotational truth and theories of positive truth can be trusted as tools to be
employed in our cognitive enquiries. This suggests that these theories have a better
epistemic status than for instance KF and FS; after all, the latter theories cannot be
trusted.
Moreover, we can see that, for a given cognitive enquiry X , if X has the epistemic
norm ‘One should only accept trustworthy theories’, then proponents of theories such
34 Although Fischer et al. do not state this explicitly, it is plausible to take the trustworthiness requirement
as a necessary condition for a theory’s adequacy. I agree with Fischer et al. that trustworthiness is a natural
and desirable property. The desirability of some form of coherence of theories of truth as been already
pointed out—although only informally—by Halbach and Horsten (2015) and by Leitgeb (2007).
35 In doing so, they follow the idea already expressed by Kreisel and Lévy (1968). I agree with Fischer et

al. that global reflection is natural and the intended way of formulating the soundness of S.
36 See Halbach (2014) and Friedman and Sheard (1987) for two presentations of FS. Another example is

the theory VF. For a presentation of VF see for instance Cantini (1990).
37 This is so because FS is ω-inconsistent. A (recursively axiomatisable) theory S is ω-inconsistent just in
case there is a ϕ, such that S  ϕ(n) for all n and S  ¬∀xϕ(x).

123

