3528

M. Zicchetti

disquotational truth are (internally) consistent if closed under global reflection principles. The aim of this paper is twofold: first, I provide a cluster of theories of truth
in classical logic that is (internally) consistent with global reflection principles: the
theories of positive truth (and falsity). After that, I analyse the epistemic value of such
theories. I do so employing the framework of cognitive projects introduced by Wright
in (2004), and employed—in the context of theories of truth—by Fischer et al. (2019).
In particular, I will argue that theories of positive truth are trustworthy, analogously to
the theories of full disquotational truth. Moreover, I argue that, for a given cognitive
project, if the acceptance of trustworthy theories is taken to be an epistemic norm of
cognitive project, then one has good reasons to accept theories of positive truth over
other rival theories of truth in classical logic. On the other hand, the latter theories are
deemed epistemically unacceptable.
The paper has the following structure: in Sect. 2, I introduce the relevant notions and
conventions about arithmetic, theories of truth, and reflection principles. After that,
in Sect. 2.2 I briefly present and discuss the theories of truth in non-classical logic
presented by Fischer et al. in Fischer et al. (2017), and their result (Proposition 1)
together with their observation that for some natural theories of truth—axiomatised
in classical logic—S, S is internally inconsistent if closed under global reflection. I
pursue my first aim in Sect. 3: I introduce and investigate the theories of positive
truth and falsity, and show that these are consistent and internally consistent if closed
under global reflection. Section 4 is devoted to the epistemological investigation of
theories of positive truth: after presenting the relevant context of cognitive projects,
the so-called authenticity-conditions, and epistemic norms, I introduce the distinction
between full disquotational and scientific truth, and the notion of trustworthiness. After
that, I argue for my claim that theories of positive are trustworthy. Moreover, I will
argue that, if to accept trustworthy theories is an epistemic norm, then one has good
reasons to accept theories of positive truth over well-known rival classical theories,
which turn out to be epistemically unacceptable. In the remainder of Sect. 4, I will
discuss a few worries and problems for the proponent of theories of positive truth, and
suggest some possible ways to respond to these worries.1

2 Introduction: Notation and Conventions
In this section, I present the notation and conventions adopted in the paper.2 Here, we
focus on PA and on theories of truth (and falsity) extending PA. We assume =, ¬, ∧, ∀
as primitive logical symbols (and take ∨, →, ↔, ∃ as standardly defined). We call the
base language of arithmetic L0 . Terms of L0 are build in the usual way from variables,
the constant 0, and by the application of successor, + and ×. For a truth theory
over PA, its language is called LT , and expands the arithmetical vocabulary with the
addition of a unary truth predicate T. Similarly, a theory of truth and falsity over PA is
formulated in a language LTF expanding the arithmetical vocabulary with additional
unary truth and falsity predicates T and F. Here we focus on theories of type-free truth
1 However, a thorough investigation of the possible responses would exceed the scope of the paper.
2 These will be standard. See Halbach (2014) for more details.

123

