328

S. Glennan

understood as continuous paths of objects through space-time that can interact when
they intersect, producing changes in the properties of the objects that constitute
those processes.
An important feature of productive causation is its locality. If one event produces
another event, the events must be either spatiotemporally contiguous, or they must
be connected by contiguous intermediate events and processes. When the bowling
bowl knocks down the pin, it comes into direct contact with the pin. When the
explosion causes Edward’s deafness, it does not do so directly, but via a causal
intermediate—the propagating blast wave. Relatedly, productivity is transitive. If
one event produces a second, and the second a third, then the first produces a third.
A good example of this is sequences of neuron firings, if neuron A’s firing produces
neuron B’s firing and neuron B’s firing produces neuron C’s firing, we say also that
neuron A’s firing produces neuron C’s firing.
While we often speak of one event being the cause of a second, there are many
productive causes of any event—both because multiple causes may be necessary to
produce an effect and because any given cause of an effect will have ancestors or
successors in their causal chains which are themselves causes of the effect.
Pragmatic considerations determine which causes we care about.
Let us turn to the second sort of causal relation—that of causal relevance or
dependence. Causal relevance is a counterfactual relation of dependence between a
fact f and an event e. A fact f is causally relevant to e iff either
(1)
(2)
(3)

e would not have occurred had it not been the case that f
e would have been more or less likely had it not been the case that f
or, in cases where e and f can be represented by quantitative variables,
the value of e would have been different if the value of f had been different.

Causal relevance, as I have defined it, is closely connected with the sort of causal
relation discussed in various counterfactual approaches to causation (e.g., Collins
et al. 2004; Lewis 1973; Woodward 2003). The most notable modification is that
while most counterfactual theories take the causal relata to be events, I am
appealing to a relation between a fact and an event.4
All kinds of facts can be causally relevant to an effect. Let’s consider some of
them:
Case 1: f is the fact that an event occurred
The fact for instance that the bowling ball struck the pin was causally relevant to
the pin falling down. More generally, events that produce an effect are also
causally relevant to that event. But the following case shows the converse doesn’t
hold.

4

I do not think it is necessary for me here to commit to any particular theories about the nature either of
facts or events. The main reason for distinguishing between them is that there are a lot more facts than
there are events—as the examples I discuss will show. For more on the nature of events, facts and other
possible candidates for causal relata see Schaffer 2003.

123

