10

with the establishment of popular control of the all-important law courts at the
beginning of the sixth century, and the elimination of imprisonment for debts
which had been instrumental in driving Greek citizens into exile or servitude.
Cleisthenes, whose constitutional reforms were adopted in 507 B.C., attacked the
principle of aristocratic power by transforming the system of tribes, and initiating
a new set of bonds based on locality rather than kinship. Individuals were now
citizens on the basis of the deme (district) they belonged to, reducing the distinctions that had existed between citizens on the basis of blood ties. The community
became more powerful through the gradual process of elevating individual citizen
democrats, and the civic community, at the expense of the aristocracy and its
interests.
In the city of Pericles and Plato, class structure was thus more fluid, with a
growing class of non-noble rich citizens. The positions of slaves, who made up
perhaps one-third of the population, and all other noncitizens, was correspondingly more ambiguous. Many slaves were independent small producers who paid a
"body rent" to their masters. Slaves occupied the managerial positions which citizens despised. Citizen and slave, freeman and noncitizen, almost all men worked
and the traditional division between those who labored and those who had the
leisure to be engaged in politics was consequently less absolute.
Despite reforms which emphasized the equality of citizens and the unity of the
civic body, the legal status of women in Athens was incompatible with a free life.
Neither aristocratic nor laboring women nor slave women could participate in the
political life of the city. Although women could inherit property, they could not
manage it. Their primary responsibility in addition to domestic labor was to bear
citizens for the city. Women's freedom was restricted in all areas of daily life, and
those women who had not produced a male heir could legally be compelled to
marry a next-of-kin to maintain property within the family. Urban Athens restricted the social and economic role of aristocratic women who were stripped of
previous tribal and ancestral familial powers. Although all women found themselves restricted by democratic laws and institutions, women who were not citizens had greater mobility than the wives and daughters of citizens, for restrictions
keeping the latter out of the public sphere did not apply to foreigners. Paradoxically, in Sparta, which was a far less democratic agrarian society, women had
access to the sphere of production and exchange; they maintained the power to
control and manage their property. Democracy, which sought to expand political
freedom, had failed to include women. Plato's politics, profoundly hostile to democracy, proposed remarkable freedom and equality for women, and he was able
to imagine women rulers and philosophers, and even women warriors, in The
Republic.
The central character of most of Plato's thirty-five dialogues is Socrates. Socrates was the principal founder of the new discourse of Western philosophy and was
spokesman for an antidemocratic ideology. With the exception of what is found in
the writings of Xenophon, Aristophanes, and Plato, very little is known with any
certainty about Socrates except that he fought in the Peloponnesian War. In 399,
he was tried and convicted of impiety and corrupting the youth of Athens. Most of

