IV. Branches of Mathematics

M(h, T )

668

T < Tc
T = Tc
T > Tc

M+

temperature Tc . For T > Tc , the magnetic susceptibility, denoted χ(T ), is deﬁned to be the rate of change of
M(h, T ) with respect to h, at h = 0. This partial derivative in h diverges as T approaches Tc from above, and
the exponent γ is deﬁned by
χ(T ) ∼ C(T − Tc )−γ ,

h

Finally, δ describes the manner in which the magnetization goes to zero as the external ﬁeld is reduced to
zero at the critical temperature. That is,
M(h, Tc ) ∼ Ch1/δ ,

as h → 0+ .

These critical exponents, like those for percolation, are
predicted to be universal and to obey various scaling
relations. They are now understood mathematically in
all dimensions except d = 3.

M+(T)

1

5.4

0
T=0

T = Tc

Figure 9 Magnetization versus external ﬁeld, and
spontaneous magnetization versus temperature.

For dimensions d ⩾ 2, the behavior of M+ (T ) when T
lies between these two extremes is quite surprising. In
particular, it is not diﬀerentiable everywhere: there is a
critical temperature Tc , depending on the dimension,
such that the spontaneous magnetization is strictly
positive for T < Tc and zero for T > Tc , and it is at
T = Tc that diﬀerentiability fails. Schematic graphs of
the magnetization versus h and the spontaneous magnetization versus T are shown in ﬁgure 9. What happens at the critical temperature itself is delicate. In all
dimensions except d = 3 it has been proved that there
is no spontaneous magnetization at the critical temperature, which is to say that M+ (Tc ) = 0. It is believed that
this is true when d = 3 as well, but it remains an open
problem to prove it.
5.3

as T → Tc+ .

Critical Exponents

The phase transition for the Ising model is again described by critical exponents. The critical exponent β,
given by
M+ (T ) ∼ C(Tc − T )β ,

as T → Tc− ,

indicates how the spontaneous magnetization disappears as the temperature increases toward the critical

Exact Solution for d = 2

In 1944, Onsager published a famous paper in which
he gave an exact solution of the two-dimensional Ising
model. His remarkable computation is a landmark in
the development of the theory of critical phenomena.
With the exact solution as a starting point, critical exponents could be calculated. As with two-dimensional
percolation, the exponents take interesting values:
1

β = 8,
5.5

7

γ = 4,

δ = 15.

Mean-Field Theory for d ⩾ 4

Two modiﬁcations of the Ising model are relatively easy
to analyze. One is to formulate the model on the inﬁnite binary tree, rather than on the integer lattice Zd .
Another is to formulate the Ising model on the so-called
“complete graph,” which is the graph consisting of n
vertices with an edge joining every pair of vertices, and
then take the limit as n goes to inﬁnity. In the latter,
known as the Curie–Weiss model, each spin interacts
equally with all the other spins, or, put another way,
each spin feels the mean ﬁeld of all the other spins. In
each of these modiﬁcations, the critical exponents take
on the so-called mean-ﬁeld values
1

β = 2,

γ = 1,

δ = 3.

Ingenious methods have been used to prove that the
Ising model on Zd has these same critical exponents
in dimensions d ⩾ 4, although in dimension 4 there
remain unresolved issues concerning logarithmic corrections to the asymptotic formulas.

