D E M O C R A C Y IN A M E R I C A

403

The social state thus organized might boast of its stability, its power, and, above
all, its glory.
But the scene is now changed. Gradually the distinctions of rank are done away;
the barriers which once severed mankind are falling down; property is divided,
power is shared by many, the light of intelligence spreads, and the capacities of all
classes are equally cultivated. The State becomes democratic, and the empire of
democracy is slowly and peaceably introduced into the institutions and the manners of the nation.
I can conceive of a society in which all men would feel an equal love and
respect for the laws of which they consider themselves as the authors; in which the
authority of the government would be respected as necessary, though not as divine; and in which the loyalty of the subject to the chief magistrate would not be a
passion, but a quiet and rational persuasion. Every individual being in the possession of rights which he is sure to retain, a kind of manly confidence and reciprocal
courtesy would arise between all classes, alike removed from pride and servility.
The people, well acquainted with their own true interests, would understand that,
in order to profit by the advantages of society, it is necessary to satisfy its requisitions. The voluntary association of the citizens might then take the place of the
individual exertions of the nobles, and the community would be alike protected
from anarchy and from oppression.
I admit that, in a democratic state thus constituted, society would not be stationary. But the impulses of the social body might there be regulated and made progressive. If there were less splendor than in the midst of an aristocracy, the contrast of misery would also be less frequent; the pleasures of enjoyment might be
less excessive, but those of comfort would be more general; the sciences might be
less perfectly cultivated, but ignorance would be less common; the impetuosity of
the feelings would be repressed, and the habits of the nation softened; there would
be more vices and fewer great crimes.
In the absence of enthusiasm and an ardent faith, great sacrifices may be obtained from the members of a commonwealth by an appeal to their understandings
and their experience; each individual will feel the same necessity of union with his
fellows to protect his own weakness; and as he knows that he can obtain their help
only on condition of helping them, he will readily perceive that his personal interest is identified with the interests of the whole community. The nation, taken as a
whole, will be less brilliant, less glorious, and perhaps less strong: but the majority of the citizens will enjoy a greater degree of prosperity, and the people will
remain quiet, not because they despair of a change for the better, but because they
are conscious that they are well off already. If all the consequences of this state of
things were not good or useful, society would at least have appropriated all such
as were useful and good; and having once and for ever renounced the social advantages of aristocracy, mankind would enter into possession of all the benefits
which democracy can afford.
But here it may be asked what we have adopted in the place of those institutions, those ideas, and those customs of our forefathers which we have abandoned. The spell of royalty is broken, but it has not been succeeded by the maj-

