626
that begin with those N digits, then we cannot avoid
ϕ without undoing our previous work. Let us call a
property avoidable if every ﬁnite binary sequence p can
be extended to a ﬁnite binary sequence q such that no
inﬁnite sequence that extends q has the property. For
instance, the property “all terms in the sequence are
zero” is avoidable, while the property “there are ten
consecutive ones in the sequence” is not avoidable.
A real number c is called generic, or Cohen, over M
if it avoids all avoidable properties that can be deﬁned
in M, that is, properties that can be deﬁned by means
of formulas that may mention sets in M. It is easy to
see that c cannot belong to M, since if it did then the
property “is equal to c” would be deﬁnable in M, and it
is certainly avoidable.
Why should a generic real number exist? Once again,
we use the fact that M is countable. From this it follows
that there are only countably many avoidable properties. If we enumerate them as ϕ1 , ϕ2 , . . . , then we can
pick a ﬁnite sequence q1 such that no inﬁnite extension
of q1 satisﬁes ϕ1 . Then we can extend q1 to q2 such that
no inﬁnite extension of q2 satisﬁes ϕ2 . Continuing in
this way we create an inﬁnite binary sequence c that
does not have any of the properties ϕi . In other words,
it is generic.
Now let M[c] be the set of all sets that can be constructed, using c and the elements of M as parameters,
in as many steps as the ordinals of M. For instance, if
M were of the form Lα , then M[c] would just be Lα (c).
The model M[c] is called a Cohen-generic extension
of M.
It turns out that, miraculously, M[c] is a model of
ZFC. Moreover, it has the same ordinals as M and, therefore, it is not of the form Lγ , for any ordinal γ. In particular, when we build L inside M[c], c does not belong to
it. These statements are by no means easy to prove, but
very roughly what Cohen showed was that a formula ϕ
is true in M[c] if and only if there is an initial segment
p of c that “forces” ϕ to be true. Moreover, the relation “p forces ϕ to be true,” which relates ﬁnite binary
sequences to formulas and is written p  ϕ, can be
deﬁned in M. Therefore, to know whether a statement
ϕ is true in M[c] one just needs to check whether there
is an initial segment p of c such that p  ϕ. In particular, using this result one can prove that M[c] satisﬁes
the ZFC axioms.
In order to build a model where CH fails, one adds
not just one generic real number but ℵM
2 of them, where
is
the
ordinal
that
plays
the
role
of ℵ2 in M. That
ℵM
2
is, it is the second uncountable cardinal in M. This

IV. Branches of Mathematics
need not be the real ℵ2 , and indeed it will not be if,
for instance, M is of the form Lα for some countable
ordinal α in V . Adding ℵM
2 generic real numbers can
be done by ﬁnitely approximating any ﬁnite number of
them while avoiding all avoidable properties they could
have. Thus, instead of ﬁnite binary sequences we now
work with ﬁnite sets of ﬁnite binary sequences indexed
by ordinals less than ℵM
2 . A generic object will be a
sequence cα : α < ℵM
2  of Cohen reals over M, all
diﬀerent, and so CH is false in the generic extension
M[cα : α < ℵM
2 ].
However, there is an important point that needs to be
addressed. When we add the new real numbers to M,
it is important that the ℵ2 of the new expanded model
is the same as ℵM
2 . Otherwise, CH might hold in the
expanded model and our work would have been wasted.
Fortunately, this is true, but again we must use the facts
about forcing to prove it.
The same kind of forcing argument allows one to construct models where the cardinality of R is ℵ3 , or ℵ27 ,
or any other cardinal of uncountable coﬁnality, i.e., any
uncountable cardinal that is not the least upper bound
of countably many smaller cardinals. The cardinality
of the continuum is, therefore, undetermined by ZFC.
Furthermore, since CH holds in Gödel’s constructible
universe L and fails in the model constructed by Cohen
using forcing, it is undecidable in ZFC.
Cohen also used forcing to prove that AC is independent of ZF. Since AC holds in L, this amounted to constructing a model of ZF in which AC was false. He did
this by adding a countable collection cn : n ∈ N of
generic real numbers to a countable model M of ZF. To
see why this works, let N be the smallest submodel of
M[cn : n ∈ N] that contains all the ordinals and the
unordered set A = {cn : n ∈ N}. Thus, N is just L(A), as
built inside M[cn : n ∈ N]. One can then show that N
is a model of ZF, but that in N there is no well-ordering
of A. The reason is that any well-ordering of A would be
deﬁnable in L(A) with a ﬁnite number of ordinals and
ﬁnitely many elements of A as parameters, and then
each one of the cn would in its turn be deﬁnable by
indicating its ordinal position in the well-ordering. But
since the whole sequence of cn s is generic over L, no
formula can distinguish one of the cn s from another
unless they appear as parameters in the formula. Since
we can choose two diﬀerent cn s that do not appear as
parameters in the deﬁnition of the well-ordering of A,
and that well-ordering distinguishes all the cn s from
each other, we have a contradiction. Therefore, the set
A cannot be well-ordered, so AC does not hold.

