Meanings as programs:
Programming Really Is Simple Mathematics
Bertrand Meyer, Reto Weber
Constructor Institute of Technology
Dedicated to Yuri Gurevich on the occasion of his 85th birthday, in homage
to his seminal contributions to the theory and practice of software.

Abstract
A re-construction of the fundamentals of programming as a small mathematical theory
(“PRISM”) based on elementary set theory. Highlights:
• Zero axioms. No properties are assumed, all are proved (from standard set theory).
• A single concept covers specifications and programs.
• Its definition only involves one relation and one set.
• Everything proceeds from three operations: choice, composition and restriction.
• These techniques suffice to derive the axioms of classic papers on the “laws of programming” as consequences and prove them mechanically.
• The ordinary subset operator suffices to define both the notion of program correctness
and the concepts of specialization and refinement.
• From this basis, the theory deduces dozens of theorems characterizing important
properties of programs and programming.
• All these theorems have been mechanically verified (using Isabelle/HOL); the proofs
are available in a public repository.
This paper is a considerable extension and rewrite of an earlier contribution [24].

1 Overview
The present article is a development of a long-term project to establish computer programming as a mathematical
theory. The core ideas were outlined in reference [24], of which it is a revision and extension, with all properties
now formally verified.
Caveat: The construction of the theory, starting with section 3, assumes no prior knowledge of programming.
While readers may have such knowledge (having possibly, for example, encountered the term “bug” before
discovering its definition in section 3.4), the best way to approach this exposition is most of the time to pretend
to be reading about a new subject — occasionally breaking this rule by relating the formal view (with the help
of “Explanation” and “Justification” paragraphs) to one’s existing understanding of programming concepts.

1.1

Programming and mathematics: two worlds, or one?

Anyone who has both written programs and studied elementary mathematics will have noticed how close the
business of writing programs is to the business of proving theorems.
Instead of taking advantage of this closeness, however, most of the work relating programs to mathematics
proceeds as if the two worlds were separate. It typically considers a program as if it were some pre-existing
object of study, like a bird for an ornithologist or a wave for a physicist, and sets out to explain it in terms
of mathematical concepts. Such an approach follows the time-honored process of using mathematics in the

1

