Privacy and the Varieties of Moral
Wrong-doing in an Information Age

i,,,,,,,,
Mi

M.J. van den Hoven
Department of Philosophy, Erasmus University Rotterdam
M.J. vandenhoven@fwb.eu,:nl

Anonymity and complexity: lack of trust, free-riding
and crime.
he privacy issue goes to the heart of an ongoing debate in
nearly all Western Democracies between Liberalists (individualists) and Communitarians (collectivists) over the question
how competing claims for personal freedom and autonomy and
the needs of the community must be balanced.
The communitarian arguments to make more information
on persons available and to relativize privacy claims are often
clear, straightforward and convincing. They refer to benefits to
the community of having knowledge about its members freely
available. A social security agency in The Netherlands (GAK)
saved the community 30 million dollars in 1996 by means of
very simple computer matching procedures to detect fraud. The
Italian government decided to match the list of people who receive government allowances because they are blind and the list
of persons who recently got their drivers-licence. The potential
for savings seems to be limited only by the limits of our imagination in data-base management. What more is there to say? Who
would object to having his data processed if such honorable community causes are served?
Communitarians usually emphasize that modern societies
exhibit high degrees of mobility and complexity, hence anonymity. And as they are quick to point out crime, free-riding and the
erosion of trust are rampant under these conditions. Political
philosopher Michael Walzer observed that "Liberalism is plagued
by free-rider problems, by people who continue to enjoy the benefits of membership and identity while no longer participating
in the activities that produce these benefits. Communitarianism,
by contrast, is the dream of a perfect free-riderlessness" (Walzer,
1995: 63).
It is not accurate to identify the communitarian stance with
the political right. As the social philosopher Alan Wolfe has observed (Wolfe, 1997: 189) in the privacy issue we have a crossing
over of political ideas. The political right hails the free-market
and abhors government intervention, yet they favor government
intervention when it comes to making knowledge on persons
widely available, signing Megan's law into action and installing
clipperchips. The political left has always proclaimed the desirability of government interventions and state regulations, but
detests interference with private decisions about abortion, sexuality and religion.

T

The communitarian diagnosis of our moral predicament goes
deeper than just pointing to crime and free-riding as the collateral damage of the volatility and superficiality of modern life. It
questions the very viability of the liberal conception of the self,
which is so central to much of modern ethical theory and political philosophy. The liberal self is -as Michael Sandel has called ittoo much of an "un-encumbered self": a self that makes its choices
-including choices about its own identity- in splendid isolation,
far from a community and a world that is already there, a self
which has no constitutive attachments and preceeds the formation of its own identity. The liberal conception of the self is thus
voluntaristic (San&l), disengaged (Taylor) and radically un-situated (Benhabib). So insisting on a moral right to privacy seems
doubly wrong from a communitarian perspective: the subject of
the right -being a figment of Enlightenment philosophy - does
not exist strictly speaking, and the protection it offers is not worth
wanting, if not clearly undesirable.
What we need therefore is not just a matter of a
counterexample proof definition of privacy, it is a matter of defending a whole philosophical tradition called liberalism and arguing for the plausibility and acceptability of the conception of
the self that comes with it.

Panoptic technologiesand the public good
According to communitarians we are thus in a sorry state and
our unquenchable thirst for privacy serves as its epitome. Information technology's applications--panoptic technologies as Oscar Gandy and Jeffrey Reiman call them--ranging from active
badges, Intelligent Vehicle Highway Systems (IVHS), Closed
Circuit Television (CCTV) and data-base mining techniques,
encourage government agencies, business firms and non-profit
organizations alike to pursue the communitarian dream of perfect free-riderlessness.
The communitarian position and the communitarian operation "Restore Trust" are backed up by the logic ofgametheory in
the following way.
Many public administration problems can be characterized
as free-rider problems: law enforcement, tax collection, implementation of environmental policies. The general description of
a free-rider problem is that it is a situation where a number of
persons contribute to the maintenance of a public good, where
each person individually has an incentive to profit from the existence of the public good without making the neccessary con-

Computers and Society, September 1997

33

