82	﻿PROBLEMS IN EPISTEMOLOGY AND METAPHYSICS

6. If accepting the truth of the content of the experience is arbitrary, then
the experience does not provide an end to the regress of reasons.
7. Therefore, experiences do not provide an end to the regress of
reasons.
The heart of the problem of experience is that foundationalists claim that the
regress of reasons ends with experiences. Foundational beliefs are justified
directly by experiences. However, the problem of experience makes a strong
case for thinking that the experiences themselves either require reasons in
order to provide justification for beliefs or relying on them to stop the regress
is picking an arbitrary stopping point. Either way foundationalism seems to be
in serious trouble.
This is not a problem shared by coherentism. According to coherentism,
experiences can support beliefs and there is a good reason to trust experience.
Our perspective with respect to beliefs based on experience includes a vast
store of beliefs about the correctness of experiential beliefs. Nevertheless,
coherentism doesn’t commit to the idea that an experience can justify beliefs
on its own. As a result, coherentism doesn’t allow that experience can stop
the regress of reasons, but as we’ve already noted, it doesn’t need to stop the
regress. The holistic perspective of coherentism doesn’t allow the regress to
get started in the first place.
The second argument exposing an advantage of coherentism over
foundationalism, we might call the problem of arbitrariness as it rests on what
Peter Klein (1940–) calls the Principle of Avoiding Arbitrariness (PAA).18 Here’s
the argument:
1. A belief that p is justified only if there is some good reason available
to the subject for p (PAA).
2. A foundational belief implies that there is no available reason for the
subject for that belief.
3. Therefore, foundational beliefs are not justified.
The problem for the foundationalist is that whichever beliefs form the
foundation, which is supposed to be the stopping point for the regress of
reasons, appear to be arbitrary from the perspective of the subject with those
beliefs. It is hard to see how foundationalism can both stop the regress of
reasons and respect the PAA. Presumably, foundationalists must deny the
PAA, but this is an intuitively plausible principle. As a result, the problem of
arbitrariness is a significant problem for foundationalism.
Again, coherentism doesn’t share this problem. Coherentists can
accept the PAA while avoiding the regress of reasons. As we noted earlier,

