European Journal for Philosophy of Science

2

(2025) 15:23

Page 13 of 19

23

A model passes a severe test when all alternatives but the model are discarded.8

A severe test must allow us to discriminate between the model and all relevant alternatives, by allowing for an outcome that would discard all but the model.
Mayo and Spanos are interested in p-value testing for hypotheses here, but this
kind of narrative, thus paraphrased, can easily be generalised to the confirmation of
models in general. The main idea is that accepting a model or hypothesis requires
discarding all its alternatives, which means exploring the space of possibilities
(see Schupbach (2018) for an account of robustness along these lines), eliminating
potential sources of errors, etc. And this is roughly what ME says. Point (1) above
is almost exactly what our point (2) at the end of Sect. 2 states, namely that a model
is discarded (not accurate) if what it excludes is actually observed. We simply need
to assimilate low probability attribution with exclusion of a possibility. As for (2), it
corresponds closely to point (4) from Sect. 2, which says that we can infer adequacy
from accuracy in a representative range of contexts. As explained previously, the
assumption that our sample of situations is representative involves making tests in
a large enough range of varying circumstances, which means, in effect, confronting
the model to all relevant alternatives, at least assuming that these alternatives would
make a difference in at least one possible context: in at least one context, they attribute very low probabilities to an outcome while our confirmed model does not.
However, what is important to understand is that the models that are directly put
to the test are not in general basic probabilistic models. They are, more typically,
composite models representing sequences of independent events, and attributing
probabilities close to 1 and 0 of getting frequencies inside or outside a range. As
a matter of fact, the frequencies of outcomes that are attributed high probabilities
will correspond closely to the probabilities of the basic model, thanks to the central
limit theorem. Considering, for example, a model of 100 independent coin toss,
where each toss has a half probability of yielding heads or tails, would give a very
high probability of obtaining roughly as many heads as tails, between 45 and 55,
say. But what is tested is not the basic coin toss model: it is a composite model,
constructed from this basic model and other assumptions (the statistical independence of every toss), with the notable feature that it yields all-or-nothing probabilities for specific outcomes (having frequencies inside or outside a range). And this
is precisely the fact that such models yield “dichotomous claims” that makes them
suitable for an empirical test, because these claims can be directly compared to
what is observed and yield a determinate conclusion, e.g. that such alternative
model is discarded (Tunç et al., 2023).
The lesson from these observations (which we do not take to be necessarily novel) is
this: mild probabilities are never inferred directly from frequencies of outcomes. Only
all-or-nothing probabilities (1 or 0), corresponding to necessities and impossibilities,
are ever confirmed experimentally. However, such probabilities can act as proxies for
8
This is not exactly what Mayo says, because the disjunction of all these models should be discarded
rather than each of them independently, but this is close enough for our purpose.

