PROGRAMMED
FOR DISASTER
Software Errors That Imperil Lives
by JONATHAN JACKY

O

N MARCH 21, 1986, oilfield worker Ray Cox
visited a clinic in Tyler, Texas, to receive radiation on his back, from which a cancerous tumor had been
removed. On the basis of previous visits, he knew the
procedure should be painless, but that day he felt a jolt of
searing heat. Outside the shielded treatment room, the
technician was puzzled by his complaint: the computer
terminal used to operate the radiation machine bore only
the cryptic message "Malfunction 54," indicating either
an overdose or an underdose. Clinic staff were unable to
find anything wrong with the machine, so they sent Cox
home and continued treating other patients. But Cox's
condition worsened. Spitting blood, he checked in to a
hospital emergency room, where doctors suspected he
had received an electric shock; in fact, he had received a
lethal overdose.
Less than a month later, Malfunction 54 occurred again
at the Tyler clinic, this time striking Verdon Kidd, a sixtysix-year-old bus driver. Kidd died in May of 1986, reportedly the first fatality ever caused by an overdose during
radiation treatment. Meanwhile, Cox became paralyzed
and lapsed into a coma, and four months later he, too,
died of the injury.
As news of the Tyler incidents spread, similar mishaps
in other clinics came to light: one patient in Canada and
another in Georgia had received mutilating injuries in
1985; an overdose occurred in Washington State in January of 1987. In each case, the radiation had come from the
Therac-25, a computer-controlled machine manufactured by Atomic Energy of Canada. After the fifth such
accident was reported, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advised-but did not order-clinics to discontinue routine use of the Therac-25 until safety features
could be installed in the equipment.
Ironically, by the time the accidents occurred, radiation
therapy had become a routine, safe, and frequently effective procedure, used on nearly four hundred and fifty
thousand new patients a year in more than eleven hundred U.S. clinics. Much of that success was due to linear
accelerators, which began to replace cobalt treatment
units in the 1960s. (Linear accelerators are electric
machines, capable of producing radiation beams whose

energy can be adjusted. The earlier equipment used a
lump of cobalt-60 as the radiation source; the units could
not be adjusted, and the intensity of the radioactivity
diminished over time.)
The million-dollar Therac-25, introduced in 1983, was
among the first of a generation of computer-controlled
linear accelerators. With the earlier accelerators, electricity and mechanical forces were used to transmit the operator's directions directly to the wheels, levers, and cables
controlling the radiation beam. But with computers, it
was necessary to transmit only information, not force, so
the operator's commands could be processed by software
-lists of coded instructions tliat tell the computer what to
do. Thus, complex electromechanical control systems
were replaced by minicomputers, and the traditional
operator's control panels, festooned with switches, but-

-22-

