

JONATHAN SCHAFFER

(derivative from, dependent on, because of, based in) the substances. I shall
not oﬀer analyses of these correlative notions.7 But I trust that they will at
least be familiar.
Perhaps the most natural explication of truthmaking within this neoAristotelian framework is that truth is grounded in the substances. Truth is
dependent. Truth is not a basic constituent of reality, and like all dependent
abstractions, truth must be made from the fundament.8 Thus I assume that
the truthmaking relation is to be identified with certain instances of the
dependence relation, namely, those which relate substance to truth:
A. Truthmaking is truthgrounding: the truthmaking relation is the relation of
grounding between substance and truth.
(A) is thus a twice-heavy assumption, for invoking a neo-Aristotelian
metaphysical framework, and for explicating truthmaking within this framework as truthgrounding.
(A) serves to give (M) metaphysical hold. Metaphysics is about the
ground of being,9 and (A) entails that truthmakers are grounds. It is via (A)
that (M) yields a form of metaphysical monism (§V below), by rendering
whole worlds as grounds. The sceptical reader may regard what follows as a
defence of the package deal of (M) plus (A). This package might equally be
described as a theory of the truthmakers plus metaphysical monism. But I should
emphasize that (A) itself is perfectly neutral – there is nothing inherently
7 See K. Fine, ‘The Study of Ontology’, Noûs,  (), pp. –, ‘Ontological Dependence’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,  (), pp. –, and ‘The Question of Realism’,
Philosopher’s Imprint,  (), pp. –; E.J. Lowe, ‘Ontological Dependences’, in E. Zalta (ed.),
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dependence-ontological,
and The Four-Category Ontology (Oxford UP, ); J. Schaﬀer, ‘On What Grounds What’, in
D. Chalmers et al. (eds), Metametaphysics (Oxford UP, ), pp. –.
8 The intuition that truth depends on being stems from Aristotle himself: ‘... if there is a
man, the statement whereby we say that there is a man is true, and reciprocally – since if
the statement whereby we say that there is a man is true, there is a man. And whereas the true
statement is in no way the cause of the actual thing’s existence, the actual thing does seem in
some way the cause of the statement’s being true: it is because the actual thing exists or does
not exist that the statement is called true or false’: ‘Categories’, in J. Barnes (ed.), The Complete
Works of Aristotle, Vol.  (Princeton UP, ), pp. –, at p. . The intuition that truth
requires grounding in the fundamental is implicit in Armstrong’s question ‘Must there not be
something about the world that makes it to be the case, that serves as an ontological ground,
for this truth?’: Armstrong, A World of States of Aﬀairs, hereafter WSA (Cambridge UP, ),
p. . This intuition is fully explicit in the following passage from Rodriguez-Pereyra: ‘... the
insight behind the idea of truthmakers is that truth is grounded.... If a certain proposition is
true, then it owes its truth to something else: its truth is not a primitive, brute, ultimate fact’:
‘Why Truthmakers’, pp. –.
9 As Aristotle puts it, ‘Substance is the subject of our enquiry; for the principles and the
causes we are seeking are those of substances. For if the universe is of the nature of a whole,
substance is its first part’: ‘Metaphysics’, in Barnes (ed.), The Complete Works of Aristotle, Vol. ,
pp. –, at p. .

©  The Author

Journal compilation ©  The Editors of The Philosophical Quarterly

