30

Ancient Philosophy

problem undermining the Contagion Principle of explanation. I will show that
after gaining understanding of how the Contagion Principle impacts on his
theory of Forms in the TMA, Plato will reformulate the theory of Forms in the
Timaeus, introducing primitive conditions, precisely to avoid the difﬁculties the
Contagion Principle generates, and to block the TMA Regress. (I will claim that
Plato’s answer to the TMA in the Timaeus is the same as Aristotle’s will be in his
Essence Regress, as we will see: the f-ness of Form F is primitive.)
We saw in Section 2.3 that the Contagion Principle explains the cause of the
qualitative state of an object by tracing it back to a source with that condition
and from which the object acquired the condition. Turning to Plato’s
Parmenides, we ﬁnd that
there are certain forms from which these other things, by getting a share of
them, derive their names – as, for instance, they come to be like by getting
a share of likeness, large by getting a share of largeness, and just and beautiful
by getting a share of justice and beauty. (130e-131a)

So there are f-things in the world (e.g. beautiful things, large things, things that
are alike); they become f by partaking of Form F, which is what it is to be f (e.g.
partaking of the Form of Beauty). Plato further states the One over Many
Principle (with the example of Largeness):
‘I suppose you think each form is one on the following ground: whenever
some number of things seem to you to be large, perhaps there seems to be
some one character, the same as you look at them all, and from that you
conclude that the large is one.’
‘That is true’, he [Socrates] said. (132a)

So, for all f-things in the world, there is one Form F, which is the type f-ness and
which is unique. However, since that Form F, which is the source of f-ness that
‘spreads’ its qualitative condition to f-things, is also f, given the f-things and Form
F, all of which are f, by the same One over Many Principle, ‘there seems to be
some one character, the same as you look at them all’, which Plato recognises:
‘What about the large itself and the other large things? If you look at them all
in the same way with the mind’s eye, again, won’t some one thing appear
large, by which all these appear large?’ ‘It seems so.’ (132a)

Nothing that Plato has said so far suggests that there is more than one Form of
Largeness. We need additionally to assume that there are no universals to
explain the similarity Plato describes (à la TBA). It is only in the following
well-known conclusion of the TMA that Plato commits himself to needing an
additional Form F to explain the f-similarity of a Form-F-and-all-other-f-things,
which then generates the regress:

