Properties in Ancient Metaphysics

43

Plato, who thought, as we saw, that parts of properties are parts of objects. Aristotle
explicitly rejects that position: the properties of the substance are not ‘in’ it as
parts. However, he neither explains nor justiﬁes this statement in the Categories.
I submit that his stance here must be underpinned by Plato’s stance in the
Theaetetus, that the number of a thing is the number of its parts (204e1-2).
Thus, a thing with parts is many, not one; and a thing that is one is partless. If
Aristotle follows Plato in thinking that a number of a thing is the number of its
parts, the properties of a substance cannot be parts of the substance, because each
substance is numerically one, as Aristotle explicitly assumes in the Categories. On
this line of thinking we can make very good sense of the stance he takes, and leaves
unjustiﬁed, that properties are not parts of substances: they cannot be, if the
substance is numerically one (a problem that neither Anaxagoras or Plato were
concerned about). Thus, if the properties of a substance are ‘in’ it, they need to be
‘in’ it in a way that does not undermine the oneness of the substance. Hovever,
neither Aristotle in the Categories nor Plato in the Theaetetus gives an account of
how this is achieved metaphysically. I contend that there is a way according to
Aristotle for components not to be parts of the whole they are in, if when in the
whole, their individuality is somehow ‘undermined’, so that they are in the whole
but not as discrete entities/parts in it. Aristotle talks about his position only in the
briefest of terms, later in the Metaphysics; but in the Categories we ﬁnd an initial
clue, where he assumes that properties in the world are either ‘said of’ or ‘in’
a subject. What is the signiﬁcance of their being said of or in a subject?
Importantly, Aristotle tells us that the deﬁnition of, for example, ‘whiteness’,
which is predicated truly of the property ‘whiteness’ in the categorial scheme, is
not predicated of the subject that whiteness qualiﬁes, for example a body – so,
what is white is not whiteness. He writes in the Categories:
In some cases there is nothing to prevent the name from being predicated of
the subject, but it is impossible for the deﬁnition to be predicated. For
example, white, which is in a subject (the body), is predicated of the subject;
for a body is called white. But the deﬁnition of white will never be predicated
of the body. (2a29-34)55

On my reading, Aristotle is indicating here when a property qualiﬁes
a substance, it does not do so by being present in the substance: for example,
‘whiteness’ as a qualiﬁcation of a body is not the presence of ‘whiteness’ in
a body; it is, rather, the body’s being white; the body is not whiteness, but it is
55

Of course, this does not apply to substantial forms, for example being human. Aristotle is clear that
the above applies only to the properties from the non-substance categories, namely only to things
which are in a subject. For substantial forms, which are the essences of substances, their deﬁnition is
said of the substances. So, substances are what their essences are, for example ‘human’, for Socrates;
and properties qualify what substances are, such as it is the human that is wise.

