36

Public Engagement with Science

professional cultures. Here are some general guidelines that may be useful for
academic researchers approaching community organizations and professionals
employed at them – and for public engagement professionals motivated to
navigate academic cultures.
To start, academic institutions and community organizations, especially nonproﬁt organizations, tend to work on different seasonal timelines. Academic
institutions are constrained by the academic year, where availability of students
and faculty for structured opportunities like courses is largely limited to the fall
and spring, while summer can provide an opportunity for more open-ended
engagement – but only with sufﬁcient advance planning. The pace of academic
initiatives tends to be very slow by the norms of other professions. The seasonal
timelines of community organizations are more variable but no less constraining.
For example, the funding and thus activities of many nonproﬁt organizations may
be tied to speciﬁc grant cycles. Museums often schedule their exhibits years in
advance, and they know to expect a rush of visitors when schools are not in
session and few visitors in September. Successful collaboration across academic
and community organizations thus requires sensitivity to and accommodation of
the timelines and constraints that shape each organization’s work. Consider, for
example, that the authors have had a conversation with a funding director of
a local nonproﬁt organization who expressed the view that it is very risky to work
with academic researchers, given all that is at stake for them in projects staying on
track for the future grant applications they will need to write on a set timeline. See
Ross et al. (2010) for helpful similar considerations for effective partnership in
community-engaged research in particular.
Regarding effective communication, note that telephone communication is
very uncommon in academic cultures, while email correspondence dominates.
In contrast, telephone communication is more common in many other professions
and reliance on email correspondence less common. Trying different modes of
communication – telephone, email, and in-person and virtual meetings – can be
useful. In many cases, initiating a conversation about communication norms and
preferences, including modes of communication, frequency, and speed of
response, can be helpful. Meeting to learn more about the other individual or
organization and to brainstorm potential collaborations can be especially valuable. One thing to be mindful of is that times of availability may differ – with early
mornings and lunchtimes oftentimes easiest for professionals, while many academics tend to schedule meetings from midmorning through early afternoon. It is
often simpler to meet somewhere other than the academic institution, as college
and university campuses can be hard to navigate and can have difﬁcult logistics,
like parking. It can be helpful to explore what meeting locations will be convenient to all parties, without presuming that other parties have ﬂexibility to travel
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 177.249.162.188, on 23 May 2025 at 04:26:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009475105

