Public Engagement with Science

57

and control one’s mental processing (Bruer, 1994, p.67). Promoting metacognitive awareness and leveraging participants’ motivations enables them to
become active participants in the engagement experience. Incorporating awareness of metacognition into one’s public engagement practices may enable
participants to engage in cognitive acts of meaning-making from experiences
and information salient to them. Meaning-making, in this context, is the process
whereby participants renovate their existing belief structures toward a coherent
worldview given new information. This strategy in the public-centered model of
public engagement with science leverages the research behind one of McCombs
and Whisler’s (1997) student-centered principles, that learning is a constructive
process that occurs best when learners can connect new information to existing
knowledge.
The sixth strategy we suggest for public-centered engagement is to utilize
participant connections. Encourage participants to see one another and themselves as resources and supports for the process in which they are engaging. This
strategy reﬂects the factors McCombs and Whisler (1997) classify as “personal
and social.” Such factors reﬂect ways in which others impact the learning process,
as learning is not done in isolation. Sharing experiences and building caring and
respectful relationships support effective engagement. This includes among
public participants, as well as with facilitators of the engagement initiative. As
we saw in strategies 1 and 2, the implicit power structures in the traditional deﬁcit
model are insufﬁcient for effective belief-value renovation. In the public-centered
model, it is critical that participants are seen as individuals with value and
potential.
Together, these strategies for public-centered engagement encourage
addressing the individual people participating in the engagement activity,
including their own relationships to and personal narratives about science.
The six strategies are summarized in Table 3. An approach based on these
strategies clariﬁes how a wide range of skills and expertise are relevant to public
engagement with science, rather than simply the expertise of scientists who
possess the scientiﬁc facts. Consider a public engagement initiative focused on
the topic of climate change and adaptation. A public audience consisting of
well-educated, politically liberal people residing in an urban setting are likely to
bring vastly different backgrounds and expectations into engagement on this
topic than, say, those who reside in rural settings, are politically conservative,
and whose profession, like coal mining, may be in tension with climate adaptation options like renewable energy. Engaging with either group requires attention to interpersonal aspects, perhaps political polarization, identities and
worldviews, and personal values and needs tied up in such a topic.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 177.249.162.188, on 23 May 2025 at 04:26:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009475105

