6. Some Basic Principles

35

As in the justiﬁcation of the rationality of Ex we may argue that it
would, in the zero knowledge situation we are limiting ourselves to, be
irrational of an agent to treat any two relation symbols of the same arity
any diﬀerently. This leads to the following principle which in our context
corresponds to Carnap’s axioms A8 and A9 from his Axiom System for
Inductive Logic see [130, page 974].
The Principle of Predicate Exchangeability, Px.
If R, R are relation symbols of L with the same arity then for  ∈ SL,
w() = w(  )
where   is the result of simultaneously replacing R by R and R by R
throughout .
Although in the statement of this principle we only transposed two relation symbols repetition of this action (and the fact that any permutation
of a ﬁnite set can be represented as compositions of transpositions) gives
that if R1 , R2 , . . . , Rk are relation symbols of L of the same arity,  ∈ Sk
(the set of permutations of {1, 2, . . . , k}) and  ∈ SL then w() = w(  )
where   is the result of simultaneously replacing Ri by R(i) throughout
 for i = 1, 2, . . . , k.
Our ﬁnal symmetry motivated principle in this chapter is perhaps
slightly more questionable. In this case the contention is that there is
a symmetry between any relation symbol R of L and its negation ¬R and
so our agent has no reason to treat R any diﬀerently than ¬R. Since ¬¬R
is logically equivalent to R this ﬁnds expression in31 :
The Strong Negation Principle, SN.
For  ∈ SL,
w() = w(  )
where   is the result of replacing each occurrence of R in  by ¬R.
Just as with Ex in the deﬁnitions of Px and SN we could equally well
have restricted  to being quantiﬁer free since the given versions then
follow.
Obviously requiring w to satisfy these three principles severely restricts
the possible choices for w, an issue which we shall return to later. Notice
that for each of Ex, Px, SN if the probability function w on SL satisﬁes
the principle then so does its restriction w  SL to a sublanguage L .32
31 There is also a weaker version of this principle, the Weak Negation Principle, motivated

by considering the symmetry as existing only when all relation symbols of L are being
replaced by their negations. Precisely,
The Weak Negation Principle, WN: For  ∈ SL, w() = w(  ), where   is the result of
simultaneously replacing each occurrence of a relation symbol in  by its negation.
In this monograph we do not study WN further.
32 By L being a sublanguage of L we mean that the set of relation symbols in L is a subset
of the set of relation symbols in L but L still has all the constant symbols a1 , a2 , a3 , . . . .

