THE

RELATIVITY

OF THE

WELFARE

CONCEPT

377

consider the influence of past and anticipated income on the evaluation of
present income.

6
A

5
im

q

.

‘
:

;

The Impact of the Past and the Future on Present Income Evaluation'

In the previous models we stressed the dependency of income standards on
the concept of an ‘anchor income’, which we defined to be (net) current income.
Although the empirical results are intuitively plausible and statistically of
good quality, we have to admit that the choice of current income is a rather
rough one, dictated by the circumstances. It is well known that income fluctuates
a great deal even for regular employees, and that apart from these more or
less random

fluctuations, income over life is not constant but will follow a

first rising and then falling profile, with a maximum somewhere near the age
of 40—although this obviously depends on the job and schooling of the individual. This relation between income and age is frequently called an earnings
profile (see Mincer, 1958).
It follows that we may doubt whether the income level of a specific individual at a specific moment in time is the best operationalization of the anchorincome. Are we not looking for a sort of ‘permanent income’ in the sense of
Friedman (1957) to use as an anchor? Let us denote that concept by y,. Let us
assume we know the earning profile of an individual; it is the sequence... y_,,

Yoo Viv Y2 .- - where the moment zero is located at present. Then we assume
that the permanent income must be a weighted average of the individual’s
earning profile. For instance, assuming only three periods of interest: the
past with income y,, the present with income y, and the future with income y,,
we may define the permanent income concept by taking a weighted average
of the log-incomes where the weights W,, W,, W,, adding up to one, reflect
the relative impact of the past, the present, and future expectations on the
formation of the permanent income concept. More specifically, we assume
en
eeaeo
e

In (y,) = W, In (y,) + W, In (y,) + We In (y¢)

The weight W, may be called the memory weight and W, the anticipation
weight. It is evident that this concept may be refined by the distinction of
more than three periods. In fact we may consider time as a continuous variable;
then the weight distribution is described by a continuous density function over
the time axis.
We estimated this weight pattern by explaining the observed income standards
not by current income alone, as done before, but by a weighted average of
past, present, and future income levels, where the past and future incomes
have been calculated by applying the previously estimated earnings profile.
We specified a specific weight pattern in such a way that it depends also on
| This section is based on van Praag and van Weeren,

1988.

