EXPLANATION

AND

PRACTICAL

REASON

217

can move from Aristotle to Galileo realizing a gain in understanding, but not
vice versa.
2. This is still not a radical departure from the foundational model. True,
decisive criteria are not drawn from the realm of facts, or of universally accepted

principles of explanation. But the crucial considerations are still accessible to
both sides. Thus the pre-Galileans were not unaware of the fact that they had
a puzzling problem with violent motion. To speak Kuhnian language, this
was an ‘anomaly’ for them, as their intellectual perplexity and the desperate
expedients they resorted to testify. The decisive arguments are transitional —they
concern what each theory has to say about the other, and about the passage
from its rival to itself—and this takes us beyond the traditional way of conceiving
validation, both positivist and Popperian. But in the strict sense of our definition
above, there are still criteria here, for the decisive considerations are such that

both sides must recognize their validity.
But, it can be argued, if we look at the seventeenth-century revolution from

a broader perspective, this ceases to be so. Thus if we stand back and compare
the dominant models of science before and after the break, we can see that
different demands were made on explanation. The notion of a science of nature,
as it came down from Plato, and especially from Aristotle, made explanation

in terms of Forms (eidé or species) central, and beyond that posited an order
of Forms, whose structure could be understood teleologically, in terms of some
notion of the good, or of what ought to be. Principles like that of plenitude,
which Lovejoy identifies and traces, make sense on that understanding: we can
know beforehand, as it were, that the universe will! be so ordered as to realize

the maximum richness.'* Similarly, explanations in terms of correspondences
are possible, since it follows from the basic conception that the same constellation
of ideas will be manifested in all the different domains.
Now if science consists of a grasp of order of this kind, then the activity of
explaining why things are as they are (what we think of as science) is intrinsically
linked to the activity of determining what the good is, and in particular how
human beings should live through attuning themselves to this order. The notion
that explanation can be distinct from practical reason, that the attempt to grasp
what the world is like can be made independent of the determination of how
we should stand in it, that the goal of understanding the cosmos can be uncoupled
from our attunement to it, made no sense to the pre-modern understanding.
But notoriously the seventeenth-century revolution brought about an uncoupling of just this kind. The turn to mechanism offered a view of the universe
as neutral; within it cause-effect relations could be exploited to serve more
than one purpose. Galileo and his successors, we might say, turned towards
an utterly different paradigm of explanation. If scientific explanation can always
be roughly understood as in some sense rendering the puzzling comprehensible
by showing how the phenomenon to be explained flows from mechanisms or
14 Arthur Lovejoy, The Great Chain of Being (Harper Torchbook Edition, 1960).

