5.3 The Inductive Route Towards Necessity

129

example, the fact that a table breaks indicates that it is possible that it breaks
(because actuality implies possibility), and this modal knowledge can then be
extended to other similar tables, to the conclusion that they are breakable.
This approach can be qualified, in Hale (2003)’s terminology, as a possibilityfirst approach: the idea is that knowledge of a given class of possibilities, and in
particular, the absence of some relevant possibilities in this class, informs us about
relations of necessity. Here, the relevant class of possibilities is the class of realised
possibilities.8
The assumption that observed situations are representative of possible situations
cannot itself be justified by induction without circularity. But this is no more
a problem than it is for other versions of induction, where one assumes that
observed situations are representative of all unobserved ones of the same type in
the universe. The notion of representativeness involved here is, of course, sensitive
to the way situations are classified into types. One could wonder at which point
some variation in an experimental setting makes the type of situation different, and
not representative anymore. I have claimed earlier that types of situations can be
defined conventionally (Sect. 5.2.1), but that some choices are more fortunate than
others. This is also related to the notion of projectibility mentioned in Sect. 5.3.2: a
property attributed to situations of a type is projectible in so far as these situations
are representative of other situations of their type with regard to this property.
As explained earlier, I presume that the assumption that a theoretical predicate
is projectible rests on experimental stability and reproducibility, so this is itself
known by induction (assuming that more mundane predicates associated with
our observations are projectible), and the same goes for representativeness. Any
assumption of representativeness is, of course, defeasible. In any case, the main
point that I wish to make here is that this kind of problem is not specific to modal
knowledge: small variations in experimental designs can also be observed among
the set of actual situations. Yet, scientists generally consider that the phenomena
observed in such designs are representative of their type.
As we can see, assuming situated possibilities, there is a homogeneity between
an induction towards universal regularities and an induction towards necessity: both
involve generalising from a sample of situations to a larger set of the same type. One
could reject the latter while accepting the former assuming some disparities between
the two cases: either merely possible situations do not exist while unobserved actual
situations do, or observed situations are representative of unobserved actual ones,
but not of merely possible ones. I assume that possible situations do exist (qua
possible states of affairs), and in this context, claiming that observed situations are
representative only of actual ones seems to be question-begging. Actual situations
are merely a sub-set of the possible situations: the ones that are realised. There
seems to be no more reason to assume a bias in the way these are selected among

8 Note that Hale explicitly rejects this option, but (1) he does not discuss inductive reasoning in his

paper, and (2) he is mainly concerned with knowledge of metaphysical modalities, and assumes,
wrongly in my opinion, that knowledge of weaker modalities must derive from it.

