Philosophy & Public Affairs

340

up the assumption that observing choices is the only source of data
on welfare, a whole new world opens up, liberating us from the informational shackles of the traditional approach.
This broader structure has many other uses, for example, permitting a clearer analysis of akrasia-the weakness of will-and clarifying
some conflicting considerations in the theory of liberty, which I have
tried to discuss elsewhere.43It also helps in analyzing the development
of behavior involving commitment in situations characterized by
games such as the Prisoners' Dilemma.44 This game is often treated,
with some justice, as the classic case of failure of individualistic rationality. There are two players and each has two strategies, which we
may call selfish and unselfish to make it easy to remember without
my having to go into too much detail. Each player is better off personally by playing the selfish strategy no matter what the other does, but
both are better off if both choose the unselfish rather than the selfish
strategy. It is individually optimal to do the selfish thing: one can only
affect one's own action and not that of the other, and given the other's
strategy-no matter what-each player is better off being selfish. But
this combination of selfish strategies, which results from self-seeking
by both, produces an outcome that is worse for both than the result of
both choosing the unselfish strategy. It can be shown that this conflict
can exist even if the game is repeated many times.
Some people find it puzzling that individual self-seeking by each
should produce an inferior outcome for all, but this, of course, is a
well-known conflict, and has been discussed in general terms for a
very long time. Indeed, it was the basis of Rousseau's famous distinc43. See Sen, "Choice, Orderings and Morality"; and also Sen, "Liberty, Unanimity and Rights," Economica 43 (1976). Note also the relevance of this structure in analyzing the incompleteness of the conception of liberty in terms of
the ability to do what one actually wishes. Cf. "If I find that I am able to do little
or nothing of what I wish, I need only contract or extinguish my wishes, and I
am made free. If the tyrant (or 'hidden persuader') manages to condition his
subjects (or customers) into losing their original wishes and embrace ('internalize') the form of life he has invented for them, he will, on this definition, have
succeeded in liberating them." I. Berlin, "Two Concepts of Liberty," in Four
Essays on Liberty (Oxford,

I969),

pp. 139-140).

44. See R.D. Luce and H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions (New York, 1958);
A. Rapoport and A.M. Chammah, Prisoner's Dilemma: A Study in Conflict and
Cooperation (Ann Arbor, I965); W.G. Runciman and A.K. Sen, "Games, Justice
and the General Will," Mind, 74 (I965); N. Howard, Paradoxes of Rationality
(Cambridge, Mass., 1971).

