636-p.qxd

4/19/2004

2:00 PM

Page 345

[Parfit] What We Could Rationally Will

345

not justify his rejection of this formula, Rawls’s contractualism does
not, as he believes, provide an argument against utilitarianism.
As Rawls points out, there is another ground on which we might
justiŠably reject some formula. We may be right to reject some formula,
however plausible it seems, if this formula’s implications conšict with
some of our strongest moral beliefs. Since Rawls assumes that utilitarianism conšicts with such beliefs, he might claim that we can justiŠably
reject the equal-chance formula on the ground that it leads to an unacceptable conclusion.
If Rawls made this claim, however, his contractualism would still
provide no argument against utilitarianism. Rawls would be appealing
to our nonutilitarian beliefs to justify our rejecting the equal-chance
formula and appealing to his no-knowledge formula. So he could not
also claim that, by rejecting the equal-chance formula and appealing to
his no-knowledge formula, we could justify our nonutilitarian beliefs. If
we defend some argument by appealing to certain beliefs, we cannot
then defend these beliefs by appealing to this argument.
Rawls might retreat to the claim that, though the equal-chance formula supports utilitarianism, his no-knowledge formula supports acceptable nonutilitarian principles. If that were true, Rawls’s appeal to
his formula would at least show that veil of ignorance contractualists do
not have to accept utilitarian conclusions. But Rawls’s Formula cannot,
I believe, achieve this aim.
When he appeals to his formula, Rawls argues that, if we had no
knowledge of the probabilities, we ought rationally to assume the
worst, and try to make our worst possible outcome as good as possible.
We ought therefore to choose the principles whose acceptance would
make the equally worst-off people as well off as possible. Since this argument tells us to maximize the minimum level, we can call it the Maximin
Argument.75
75
Rawls sometimes deŠnes the worst-off group in broad terms, so that this group includes many people who are better off than some other people. On one suggestion, for example, the worst-off people are those whose income is below the average income of unskilled
workers (TJ, p. 98, RE, p. 84). But, if the Maximin Argument were sound, it would support
a much narrower deŠnition of this group. On this argument, each person ought to try to
make her own worst possible outcome as good as possible. On Rawls’s deŠnition, we should
support policies that make the representative or average member of the worst-off group better off, even when that would be worse for the worst-off people in this group. That is precisely what, when applied to society as a whole, Rawls’s argument is claimed to oppose.
When defending his broad deŠnitions, Rawls writes: “we are entitled at some point to plead
practical considerations, for sooner or later the capacity of philosophical or other arguments
to make Šner discriminations must run out.” But there is no difŠculty in describing the
worst-off group as those who are equally worst-off, since they are not better off than anyone
else.

