636-p.qxd

4/19/2004

350

2:00 PM

Page 350

The Tanner Lectures on Human Values

appeals to the principles whose choice would be rational in self-interested terms, he cannot plausibly deny that we could rationally choose
rule utilitarian principles, running the risks of bearing some burdens for
the sake of possible beneŠts.
Since Kant’s Formula neither requires an agreement nor has a veil of
ignorance, it better achieves contractualism’s protective aim. On this
formula, we ought not to impose burdens on anyone unless our act is
permitted by some principle that this person could rationally choose,
even when she knows that she is one of the people who would bear such
burdens. And such people, we can argue, could not rationally choose
rule utilitarian principles.
Kant’s Formula has other advantages. Though Rawls’s veil of ignorance ensures impartiality, it does that crudely, like frontal lobotomy.
The disagreements between different people are not resolved but suppressed. Since no one knows anything about themselves, unanimity is
guaranteed. In the thought-experiments to which Kant’s Formula appeals, everyone knows how their interests conšict with the interests of
others. Since unanimity is not guaranteed, it would be signiŠcant if
unanimity could be achieved.
Whether unanimity could be achieved depends on what we ought to
believe about rationality and reasons. If we ought to accept a desirebased theory, or the Self-interest Theory, Kant’s Formula could not succeed. If each person supposed that she had the power to choose which
principles we would all accept, there would be no set of principles whose
choice would be rational for everyone in self-interested terms. Nor
would there be some set of principles whose acceptance would best fulŠl
everyone’s informed desires.
We ought, I believe, to reject all desire-based theories. And though
the Self-interest Theory is of the right kind, in being value-based, this
theory is too narrow. On the wide value-based view that I believe we
should accept, we have strong reasons to care about our own well-being,
and in a temporally neutral way. But our own well-being is not the
supremely rational ultimate aim. We can rationally care as much, or
more, about some other things, such as justice, and the well-being of
others.
If we combine Kant’s Formula with this view about reasons, does
this formula succeed? Ought we to act on the principles whose universal
acceptance everyone could rationally will?

