34I

Rational Fools

tion between the "general will" and the "will of all."45But the puzzle
from the point of view of rational behavior lies in the fact that in
actual situations people often do not follow the selfish strategy. Real
life examples of this type of behavior in complex circumstances are
well known, but even in controlled experiments in laboratory conditions people playing the Prisoners' Dilemma frequently do the unselfish thing.46
In interpreting these experimental results, the game theorist is
tempted to put it down to the lack of intelligence of the players: "Evidently the run-of-the-mill players are not strategically sophisticated
enough to have figured out that strategy DD [the selfish strategy] is the
only rationally defensible strategy, and this intellectual short-coming
saves them from losing."47 A more fruitful approach may lie in permitting the possibility that the person is more sophisticated than the
theory allows and that he has asked himself what type of preference he
would like the other player to have, and on somewhat Kantian grounds
has considered the case for himself having those preferences, or behaving as if he had them. This line of reasoning requires him to consider the modifications of the game that would be brought about by
acting through commitment (in terms of "revealed preferences," this
would look as if he had different preferences from the ones he actually
had), and he has to assess alternative behavior norms in that light. I
have discussed these issues elsewhere;48 thus I shall simply note here
that the apparatus of ranking of rankings assists the reasoning which
involves considering the merits of having different types of preferences
(or of acting as if one had them).
VIII
Admitting behavior based on commitment would, of course have farreaching consequences on the nature of many economic models. I
45. See Runciman and Sen.
46. See, for example, L.B. Lave, "An Empirical Approach to the Prisoner's
Dilemma Game," Quarterly Journal of Economics 76 (I962), and Rapoport and
Chammah, Prisoner's Dilemma.
47. Rapoport and Chammah, p. 29.
48. Sen, "Choice, Orderings and Morality." See also K. Baier, "Rationality and
Morality," and A.K. Sen, "Rationality and Morality: A Reply," both forthcoming in Erkenntnis; K. Baier, The Moral Point of View (Ithaca, I958); and Fred
Schick's analysis, "Rationality and Sociality."

