a r eactionary r eason

219

undermined that unconditioned submission to authority that, alone, could
save society. His target was not the by-­then-­distant revolution but liberal
and patriotic movements. To fight them, Leopardi founded the periodical
the Voice of Reason and published a book: Short Dialogues on the Matters of
1831, a series of witty, ironical dialogues in which fictitious characters ridiculed tenets of liberalism such as political constitutions, popular sovereignty,
and public education. Lauberg had urged Jacobins to wield the weapon of
ridicule against the “Gothic barbarism” being prepared by counterrevolutionary forces. Canosa, like Maistre, employed the same weapon against Jacobins
and liberals. But the masterpiece of counterrevolutionary and anti-­liberal
satire are probably Leopardi’s dialogues, which went through six reprints in
three months.54
Pulcinella’s Travel is one of the most famous dialogues. Pulcinella is the
traditional Neapolitan mask-­character, who represented, in the commedia
dell’arte, a simple but resourceful man of the people. In Leopardi’s piece,
Pulcinella—­common sense—­and a Doctor—­the liberal intellectual—­discuss
the establishment of a constitutional government in Naples. The Doctor explains to Pulcinella that the king of Naples is an absolute king:
pulcinella: What does absolute king mean?
doctor: It means that he rules according to his own will, without depending
on anyone else.
p: What a mess! But tell me one thing. The shoemaker rules in his shop, the
host rules in his tavern, the head of the house rules in his family, and why
should the king not rule in his own kingdom?
d: He can rule, but according to the laws.
p: This is right. I understand. Justice for everyone. But tell me, signor doctor,
does not the king of Naples rule exactly like this? He makes the laws and
rules according to them. When the laws are not good anymore, he makes
new laws, and again he rules according to them.
d: And this is precisely what is wrong.
p: Why?
d: Because the king should not make the laws.
p: Why?
d: Because he is not the sovereign.
p: Hell! And who’s the sovereign if not the king?
d: The people.
p: That’s the best one. And the people didn’t know it?
d: We used to live in ignorance.55

