232

chapter eight

from its relation to empirical reality, but they should not indulge in “sterile
abstractions and generalizations” either, as the latter might be “founded upon
not-­too-­sound hypotheses.” It followed that the most pressing problem was
one of order and discipline: mathematical practice needed to be “rigorized,”
grounded on solid logical or intuitive terrain. Eighteenth-­century analytic
practice, with its unbounded algebraic optimism, was not just morally and
philosophically reprehensible: it was technically unsound. The return to order
needed to begin from mathematics.9
Is this interpretation only useful in the context of the Italian peninsula,
a land of precocious and profound anti-­Enlightenment reactions? There are
other debates between supporters of geometrical and analytic methods on
the Continent and in Great Britain during the first half of the nineteenth century, but I do not assume that they can be interpreted along the same lines. In
any case, concentrating only on the opposition between synthesis and analysis would distract our attention from what seems to be the real leitmotif that
links the research of Fergola and Ruffini: the defense of reactionary reason
through mathematics.
To look for similar mathematical experiences means searching for attempts to rethink mathematics as a self-­standing body of knowledge, not defined by its relation to empirical reality, and whose applications can be useful
but are limited in scope. Such experiences are often flagged by the appearance
and success of the new notion of “pure mathematics,” a field that, once properly defined, would be the mathematician’s legitimate kingdom. The nature of
the foundation can vary from geometrical intuition to some form of logical
consistency. But the key move is severing once and for all the connection
between formal algebraic procedures and the inner structure of empirical
reality—­that is, the link that had legitimated the rampant mathematization
of social and political life, emblemized by the likes of Condorcet and the
Neapolitan Jacobins. Emphasis on such a notion of pure mathematics, often
framed in terms of resistance against French military and philosophical occupation, figured quite prominently, for example, in the German-­speaking
lands. But rather than describing yet another case from the margins of the
French Empire, let’s take one last step toward its very center.
Et in Paris Ego
Arriving in Paris from Naples via Modena sharpens our gaze. Parisian mathematical life lacked the extreme polarization and the institutional tensions that
we have found in Naples. Mathematical practice here seems, at first glance,
more progressive and continuous. The standard narrative of its transformation

