154

FOUNDATIONS OR COHERENCE?

The alternative coherent system objection holds that there may be many mutually
incompatible coherent systems that are equally coherent. Even though some such
coherent system could provide a correct account of the world while the others do
not, coherentism is unable to choose this coherent system as being more justified
than the others. So, assuming that astronomy and astrology are each equally
coherent, the coherentist is not more justified in believing the former rather than
the latter.
In response to this objection, Bonjour acknowledges that two belief systems
may be equally coherent at some particular time, but that this tie is likely to be
broken in the long run and with the continuing impact of cognitively spontaneous
beliefs.
What, if anything, guarantees in the long run that two equally coherent belief
systems will not remain equally coherent?
Either Bonjour clandestinely resorts to the foundationalist idea that cognitively
spontaneous beliefs are epistemically privileged or he simply assumes the falsity of
scepticism. Yet as long as scepticism is in the field of competitors, one cannot assume,
as Bonjour does, that mutually incompatible yet equally coherent belief systems will
eventually differ with respect to their degrees of internal coherence. We will return to
this point.
A general problem with coherentism is the so-called problem of truth. The
objection states that coherence may be a necessary but not a sufficient condition
for justification because, by itself, it does not allow one to distinguish truth from
deluded but coherent theories or belief systems. Fairy tales, dreams, and hallucinations may sometimes be coherent. A completely internal and subjective notion of
justification, such as coherence, cannot bridge the gap between true belief, which
might be no more than a lucky guess, and knowledge, which must be grounded in
some connection between internal subjective conditions and empirical data. Coherentism must somehow show that coherently justified beliefs are more likely to be
true than beliefs that are not justified in this way. (We have already touched upon the
problem of truth in connection with 50S a's text.)
One attempt to connect up coherence with truth is the adoption of a coherence
theory of truth, that is, the view that a belief is true if and only if it coheres with a set
of beliefs. If truth is defined in terms of coherence, it is a definitional truth that
coherence is truth-conducive. The obvious problem with the coherence theory of
truth is, however, that it is not clear why it shouldn't be possible for a belief to enjoy
coherentist justification and nevertheless be false. In paragraphs ~ and [h}-3>
Bonjour rejects the coherence theory of truth and instead adopts the correspondence
theory of truth, which states that a belief that p is true if and only if it corresponds
with the fact that p. The correspondence theory captures our commonsense intuition
that truth depends on something in the world to make it true.
Bonjour mentions in passing that the correspondence theory of truth poses
unresolved problems.

