Thinking Through Drama

I, that am rudely stamped, and want love’s majesty
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling Nature,
Deformed, unﬁnished, sent before my time
Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them –
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
And descant on mine own deformity.
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
I am determinèd to prove a villain
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams,
To set my brother Clarence and the king
In deadly hate the one against the other;
And if King Edward be as true and just
As I am subtle, false, and treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mewed up
About a prophecy, which says that G
Of Edward’s heirs the murderer shall be.

20

25

30

35

40

How can we help students ﬁnd the argument embedded in the language of
this soliloquy? By analyzing its overall structure, and especially by attending
to Shakespeare’s use of the iambic pentameter verse line.
We can break the soliloquy down into three parts: lines 1–13, 14–27,
and 28–40. Notice how those parts begin “Now is”; “But I”; “And therefore,” which form the skeleton of an argument. We might summarize that
argument like this: (1) The bad times are over for our family. We now are
enjoying the pleasures of victory and my brother is indulging his taste for
the sybaritic lifestyle that he adores. (2) But I am not well suited to the pleasures of peace. I am ugly, malformed, and discontented. (3) And so, if I can’t
be a lover, like Edward, I’ll be a villain.
Notice how, as is usual in Shakespeare, the main thoughts incorporate the
present tense. Also, Richard, like many of Shakespeare’s villains, is improvising as he goes along. He changes constantly, like the “camelion” to which
he compares himself in 3 Henry VI (III. ii. 191). Richard speciﬁcally absolves
Edward of engineering Clarence’s imprisonment. He blames Queen



