

Critical Reading in the Disciplines

This last question, and the sentence to which it refers, illustrates the gap
to be bridged between the nineteenth century in which Middlemarch was
written and the twenty-ﬁrst century in which we now read it. The “Middlemarch mercer of polite manners and superﬂuous aspirates,” being a shopkeeper (as a mercer he sells cloths and fabrics), is in trade. This was a critical
distinction in class-bound Victorian English society: his “polite manners”
are therefore directed at those higher-class patrons who visit his shop. So,
for “polite” read “deferential.”
A nuance such as this will need unpacking with students to whom provincial Victorian England will, up to now, have been literally a closed book. But
alerting students to the importance of social and historical, as well as literary and cultural, contexts is essential to the whole project of critical reading.
Indeed, literary and cultural contexts overlap, and the analysis needs to be
taken further, for what does George Eliot mean by “superﬂuous aspirates”?
An aspirate is a term in phonetics meaning “the sound represented in
English and several other languages by the letter h” (Chambers 21st Century Dictionary). Sounding, or failing to sound, the letter h appropriately
used to be a clear social marker in England: those who failed to sound the
aspirate when it should be sounded betrayed themselves (it was assumed) as
ill-educated. Some people, however, trying too hard, sounded aitches where
they did not belong, and by so doing – using a “superﬂuity of aspirates” –
betrayed their lack of social or educational conﬁdence. This is what the Middlemarch mercer did, and it is what the narrator explicitly draws the reader’s
attention to.
If all this linguistic snobbery sounds absurd today, it is worth encouraging
students to look at other instances in Victorian and early twentieth-century
literature; by doing so, they will gain a clearer insight into a world of cultural discrimination that may be totally dissimilar to their own, but which
was deeply embedded in the literature of the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. The following task would support such student-based research:
Exercise 2

r Read “The Ruined Maid” by Thomas Hardy (1866) and “The Oxford
Voice” by D. H. Lawrence (1928). In what ways, if any, do these poems
enlarge your understanding of the issues of social class raised in the passage from Middlemarch, chapter XXIX?
Having examined this brief passage from Middlemarch, and explored
within it the social nuances and implicit attitudes outlined above, it is open
to students to extend this critical reading to the rest of the novel. They need

