Metaphysics

The Causal Structure of the Physical

relation as "non-Humean causation" in a materialist ontology by
arguing that science itself needs to postulate such a relation.
As far as fundamental physics is concerned, I have already indicated why I think that such views are wrong. Quantum mechanics has
no realist interpretation at all, which is why it is an embarrassment
to materialists (generally they write as if quantum mechanics did not
exist). But if we make quantum mechanics look classical by leaving
out the observer and the observer's side of the cut between system
and observer, or if we confine attention to pre-quantum mechanical
physics, then the world looks like this: there is a closed system (in
classical physics this could be the whole physical universe) that has a
maximal state at each time (along each time-like hyperplane). There
is a well-defined mathematical function that determines the state at
all earlier and later times (depending on the characteristics of the system). The equations of motion (for example, the Dirac equation)
enable one to determine this function. If one says, "The states do not
merely succeed one another in the way the theory says; each state
necessitates the succeeding states," then one is not reporting the content of classical physics, but reading in a metaphysical interpretation
that physicists have long rejected as unnecessary. Even the timedirectedness of causal processes disappears in fundamental physics.
When we come to sciences less fundamental than fundamental particle physics, say sociology or history, or even to evolutionary biology,
or even to chemistry or solid-state physics, then, of course, we find
that causation-as-bringing-about is invoked constantly, in the guise of
disposition talk ("the gazelle's speed enables it to outrun the lion most
of the time"), in the guise of counterfactuals ("the salt would have
dissolved if the solution had not been saturated"), and in the guise of
"causes"-statements ("the extreme cold caused the material to
become brittle"). Even in fundamental particle physics such talk
becomes indispensable when we apply the physics to actual systems
that are (of course) not the whole universe-regarded-as-a-closedsystem. But the ontology-the Weltbild--of materialist metaphysics
is, remember, the ontology of the universe-as-a-closed-system-froma-God's-eye-view; and it is precisely this ontology and this Weltbild
that has no room for "non-Humean causation."
One way of reconciling the indispensability of causation-asbringing-about in daily life and in applied science with the fact that
no mysterious relation of "non-Humean causation" figures in the
world picture of fundamental physics at all was suggested by Mill

(and revived by John Mackie)." Fundamental physics implicitly
defines a notion Mill called "the total cause" (at a given time). In postEinsteinian physics, we might define the total cause at time to of an .
event A (at a time subsequent to to) to be the entire three-dimensional
space-time region that constitutes the bottom of A's light cone at the
time to. Any aspect of this region that is sufficient to produce A (at
the appropriate time t l ) by virtue of the Dirac equation (or the appropriate equation of motion) may also be called a "total cause" of A.
When we say that the extreme cold (at to) caused the material to be
brittle (at tl)' then we do not mean that this was the total cause of
the material's becoming brittle (even given the cold at to, the material
would not have become brittle if a heater had been present and preset
to turn on immediately after to, for example). What we do, according
to Mill and Mackie, is pick out a part of the total cause that we regard
as important because of its predictive and explanatory utility. If we
discover that the cold was correlated with something that by itself
provides an explanation of the material's becoming brittle, and the
material will become brittle even in the absence of the cold if this
correlated factor is still present, then we will change our inferencelicensing practice and we will also select a different part of the total
cause to call "the cause." Which is "the cause" and which a "background condition" depends on a picking out, an act of selection,
which depends on what we know and can use in prediction; and this
is not written into the physical system itself.
If we postulate a "non-Humean causation" in the physical world,
then we are treating causation-as-bringing-about as something built
into the physical universe itself: we are saying that the physical universe distinguishes between "bringers-about" and "background conditions." This seems incredible; after all, if heaters were normally set
to turn on when a place got cold, then we might very well choose to
say that the cause of the material's becoming brittle was that the heater malfunctioned and allowed the place to get cold (which is quite
different from saying that the extreme cold at to-prior to when the
heater would have turned on-is the cause). Like counterfactuals,
causal statements depend on what we regard as a "normal" state of
affairs, what we regard as a state of affairs "similar" to the actual,
and so on. For example, when a heater is present, then we regard it
as "normal" that it should turn on at the preset time, and this is a
reason for singling out the "exceptional" part of the total situationthe heater's failing to turn on-as a "cause" and not as a "background

86

87

