32

Metaphysics

Berkeley, can simply hold that both sorts of properties are mind-dependent. This
provides a way to refute scepticism. As all properties, and indeed all entities, are
mind-dependent, we can resist scepticism: our senses do not mislead us about
the nature of material entities because there are no material entities.
Even this overly simpliﬁed description sufﬁces for us to be able to easily see
why Berkeleyan idealism is a common ﬁrst view that people think of as an
alternative to realism. Berkeley clearly cannot hold that there exists a mindindependent reality in that he holds that all that exists is mind-dependent.
However, Berkeleyan idealism, nor idealism more generally, is not the normal
territory for contemporary anti-realists. This is, I think, for two main reasons.
The ﬁrst is the unpopularity of idealism in the contemporary (analytic)
philosophical world. Indeed, refuting idealism (and scepticism) was one of
the major aims of many important ﬁgures in the early parts of the twentieth
century and at the emergence of the analytic tradition. For example, founding
ﬁgures of analytic philosophy such as Moore (1899, 1903, 1925), Stebbing
(1929, 1932–1933, 1942; see also Janssen-Lauret Forthcoming), and Russell
(1912) all devote signiﬁcant time to discussing the ‘threat’ of idealism, and their
work has shaped the literature signiﬁcantly even to this day (though we should
note that Russell did also, at one time, defend idealism; see Grifﬁn 1991; Hylton
1990). Even Carnap, one of the most signiﬁcant anti-realists in the twentieth
century, held that his work was ‘neutral with respect to the traditional controversies, e.g., realism vs. idealism’ in the sense that he saw his work as rejecting
both (1963: 17–18).
This is not to deny that there are historical exceptions to this trend, such as
Bradley (1897), McTaggart (1921–1927), and Royce (1919) and that some
more recent defences can be found such as in Goldschmidt and Pearce (2017).
But, while it would be false to say that idealism is ‘dead’, it is fair to say that it is
not widely defended and not a major view within the realism/anti-realism
literature today.
The second reason is related to the metametaphysical commitments of many
contemporary anti-realists. The literature on realism has, for better or worse,
largely shifted away from discussions of idealism and towards versions of antirealism that also incorporate some form of metaontological anti-realism (see
Section 2.6). Contemporary anti-realists tend to focus on concerns about the
intelligibility of realism (and metaphysics more widely) that arise from the sorts
of epistemological and semantic concerns that I grouped together under the
accessibility commitment of realism.
Such concerns are not normally found in idealism, at least with respect to
realism that is global in scope. Idealists may raise particular semantic or
epistemic arguments against realism. Berkeley famously argues against the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009006927 Published online by Cambridge University Press

