Metaphysical Realism and Anti-Realism

31

Certainly missing many other examples, forms of idealism can be found in the
Vedānta school of Hindu philosophy (see Hamilton 2001; King 1995), and the
Lu-Wang School of Neo-Confucianism (see Ivanhoe 2009). Agada (2019,
2021) has recently argued for the importance of consolationism within the
African philosophical tradition and has called this a form of ‘African idealism’.
In the Western philosophical tradition, often following and building on the work
of Kant, there is the German idealism of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel and the
British–American idealism most associated with people such as Bradley,
McTaggart, and Royce. Given all of these distinct forms of idealism, each
stemming from their own complex philosophical traditions, to try to cover
idealism as a whole would be well beyond the limits and scope of this Element.
Therefore, I will limit the discussion here to one form of idealism that has
been particularly inﬂuential in debates about metaphysical realism. Guyer and
Horstmann (2021) call this version ‘metaphysical’ or ‘ontological idealism’, as
opposed to ‘epistemological idealism’ (which is closer in spirit to some of the
views that will be discussed in Section 3.3). Ontological idealism is the view
that everything that exists is (in some way) mental. There are no ‘physical’
entities existing outside of our experience of them, or as deVries puts it:
‘Roughly, [idealism] comprises theories that attribute ontological priority to
the mental, especially the conceptual or ideational, over the non-mental’ (2009:
211). The idealist therefore accepts the existence requirement but rejects the
independence criterion.
Ontological idealism ﬁnds its most famous supporter in the Western tradition
in George Berkeley (though he labels his position ‘immaterialism’). Berkeley
holds that all that exists are minds and ideas, rejecting the existence of material
objects entirely. Berkeley puts forward various arguments for idealism, both
from an epistemic and metaphysical perspective, and argues against ‘materialism’ as the view that material entities exist or, equivalently, that there are mindindependent entities. ‘Materialism’ is therefore the view that we have been
calling ‘realism’. (The range and complexity of Berkeley’s arguments cannot be
done justice here. For more detail see Berkeley 1948–1957; for good introductions to Berkeley’s idealism, see Rickless 2013; Winkler 1989.)
Berkeley (in part) argues against realism on the basis that only idealism can
resolve the threat of scepticism. Berkeley argues that the materialist has no
reliable way to distinguish between those ‘true’ properties of an object and those
properties that we are misperceiving, thereby undermining the distinction
present in Locke between primary and secondary qualities. The realist cannot
explain why we should think that some properties, like colour or taste, are
merely properties of perception, while other properties, such as weight and
shape, are properties of mind-independent objects. In contrast, an idealist, says
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009006927 Published online by Cambridge University Press

