Metaphysics

Truth and Convention

It is easy to see why Professor Antipode should like this line. In the
case of the two versions we have been discussing, the reductive interpretation is syncategorematic; that is, it interprets sentence (1) (and
likewise any other sentence of Carnap's language) as a whole, but
does not identify the individual words in (1) with individual words
and phrases in (2); nor does it identify "mereological sums" with any
objects in the language to which the reducing is being done. (1) as a
whole is "translated" by (2) as a whole; but the noun-phrase "object
which is partly red and partly black" has no translation by itself. In
this case the moral of the translation-the moral if Professor Antipode imitates Quine's rhetoric-is slightly different. We cannot say
either mereological sums are identical with the entities with which we
identified them or they don't really exist (because the "translation,"
or relative interpretation of the Polish logician's language in Carnap's
language, didn't identify "mereological sums" with anything; it just
showed how to translate sentences about them syncategorematically).
The moral is, rather, mereological sums don't really exist, but it is
sometimes useful to talk as if they existed. Of course Professor Antipode would be delighted with this moral!
I do not mean to give the impression that the possibility of reducing
entities away by a formal translation scheme is always decisive evidence that they don't really exist, according to Quine. Sometimes we
have the choice of either doing without one batch of entities, call them
the A entities, or doing without another batch, call them the B entities-the reduction may be possible in either direction. In such a case,
Occam's Razor doesn't know whom to shave! Or the reducing language may itself seem suspicious (some people think sets are very suspicious entities). But, when the reducing language (the prima facie
"poorer" language) is one we are happy with, and the reduction does
not go both ways, it is clear that Quine regards this as very strong
evidence for denying the real existence of the unreduced entities.
Carnap, on the other hand, rejected the idea that there is "evidence" against the "existence" of numbers (or against the existence
of numbers as objects distinct from sets). He would, I am sure, have
similarly rejected the idea that there is evidence against the "existence" of mereological sums. I know what he would have said about
this question: he would have said that the question is one of a choice
of a language. On some days it may be convenient to use what I have
been calling "Carnap's language" (although he would not have
objected to the other language); on the other days it may be conve-

nient to use the Polish logician's language. For some purposes it may
be convenient to regard the Polish logician's language of mereological
sums as "primitive notation"; in other contexts it may be better to
take Carnap's language as the primitive notation and to regard the
Polish logician's language as "abbreviations," or defined notation.
And I agree with him.
It will be seen that there are a number of different stances one could
take on the question of the relation between (1) and (2). One could
say:

102

103

(a) The two sentences are mathematically equivalent.
(b) The two sentences are logically equivalent.
(c) The two sentences are neither logically nor mathematically
equivalent.
(d) The first sentence is false and the second true (Professor
Antipode's position).
(e) The two sentences are alike in truth-value and meaning.
(f) The two sentences are alike in truth-value and unlike in
meanmg.
(g) The second sentence can be used as an abbreviation of the
first, but this is really just a useful "make believe."
My own position-and my own internal realism-is that there is
no fact of the matter as to which of these positions is correct. Taking
the original dispute up into the "metalevel" and reformulating it as a
dispute about the properties-mathematical or logical equivalence,
synonymy, or whatever-of linguistic forms doesn't help. None of
these notions is well defined enough to be a useful tool in such cases.
Suppose, for example, I follow the apparently innocent route
pioneered by Donald Davidson, and say that the test for meaning is
to see what we get when we construct a theory of the language which
is (i) recursively presented (in the style of a Tarskian truth definition),
and (ii) in accord with translation practice.' Obviously, I shall have
to admit that it violates standard translation practice to give (2) as a
translation of (1).6 This settles the truth-value of (e) above; (e) is false,
whether the sentences are alike or unlike in truth-value, since they are
not the same in meaning.
Suppose we follow Davidson farther, and accept the central
Davidsonian tenet that if I regard a sentence in an "alien language"
as meaningful (and I claim to know what it means), then I must be
able to give (or would be able to give, if I were sufficiently self-con-

