LIFE’S MEANING

45

of person you wish to be (short of the qualitatively new person no
longer being numerically identical to you). And the result machine
brings about whatever you could realistically wish to bring about in the
world: it allows you to ‘make a difference’ to the world. Your brain gets
plugged into a machine; then you recline in a tank, lazing away the
ensuing minutes, months, or years. What could be better than that? If
you believe that meaning is present within any life that includes various kinds of experience (including ‘virtual’ ones), or within any life that
is available only to a particular kind of person, or within a life that
makes the world significantly different, then shouldn’t you reach
eagerly for those machines?
‘Not at all,’ Nozick would say. He assumes that people would refuse
the invitation to be ‘plugged-in’. He seems to think that to be plugged-in
is to lessen the living of one’s own life as such. How might that be so?
Nozick provides no detailed analysis.
But here is one idea (as we continue seeking an understanding of what
meaning could be): Possibly, there is no meaning in a life that can be controlled so effectively. Many people find repellent the possibility of being
causally determined ‘from outside’ (as described in Chapter 2
(Determinism)). They might think that this would make living meaningless. Still, regardless of whether they are right about that, maybe our lives
would lack meaning if we were to control them in advance ourselves.
Why might such control be incompatible with meaning? Again, it
depends on what meaning involves. One possible dimension of meaning that we have not discussed is that of personal struggle and hope.
Sisyphus struggles; but he can never triumph, escaping his underlying
fate – and he knows this already. Insofar as he knows whatever will
happen in his life, he cannot live in hope of something else occurring.
Might our own lives be meaningless when hope either does or should
depart? Hope does depart when the feeling of hope goes. Hope should
depart whenever its still being present as a feeling is only because one
is ignoring facts which render hope futile and of which one should be
aware. And one circumstance in which it can be futile for you to hope
that some specific event will occur is when that event has already
clearly occurred or when you already know that it will occur.
Hence, insofar as you can control your life via Nozick’s machines,
you should abandon your hopes. For you cannot still hope to achieve
something that you have already achieved, or that you already know
you will achieve. And you already know that Nozick’s machines will
bring about your achieving whatever you wish to achieve by using
them. Accordingly, being plugged into one of his machines should drive
away all associated hopes.

