16

REALITY? KNOWLEDGE? PHILOSOPHY!

And fatalists reason like that about all facts. Fatalism requires just the
idea that if (for example) you are scratching your head right now, it is true
at any other time – including any time in the past – that at this time you
are scratching your head. Whatever is was always going to be – because
it is. Whatever will be was always going to be – because it will be.
Will fatalism therefore encourage some disturbing attitudes? Does it
imply that we should stop caring about the future, striving to bring
about one future rather than another? Would there be no point in deliberating as to whether to help someone in distress? (‘Why should
I bother? If they’re to be saved, it’s already true that they will be saved.
I can’t change that. Nor can I change it if they aren’t to be saved’.)
Determinism, too, is sometimes thought to generate fatalist attitudes:
‘If everything is causally determined, then the causal pattern has
already begun which will, or will not, result in the person’s being saved.
It’s too late for me to decide whether to help.’
But perhaps those attitudes arise through misunderstanding fatalism.
If fatalism is true, there is a future which you cannot prevent occurring;
nonetheless, its occurring could depend on how you act right now –
which might even involve your having deliberated before acting. And
we can still try to act morally, because there continue to be morally better or worse outcomes. Your acting in some particular way now might
be exactly what is needed if someone’s pain and suffering is to be eased
tomorrow, for instance. Trying to act well might be a necessary prelude
to acting well; perhaps all of this is unavoidable for you. Your trying to
act well – after wondering whether to do so – could have already been
destined to occur! Fatalism is no foe of our trying to act well.
Question 2.2 ‘Nature – our genes – makes us what we are.’ ‘No, nurture – family, society – does so.’ ‘You are both wrong. It’s a combination of the two.’ Do
these three claims exhaust the relevant possibilities? If so, is everything about you
causally determined in one of these ways? Or could you be what you are, at a given
time, without having been caused to be so?

What is free will?
Many people feel threatened when alerted to the possibility that either
determinism or fatalism is true. Accordingly, it is not unusual to
encounter vehement denials that either of those doctrines is true – or at
least that either is true of us, even if they happen to be true of much else
in the world. (‘We are free in many of our thoughts and actions. Maybe
slugs aren’t, though.’) Yet if neither determinism nor fatalism is true of
us, what does this reveal about how we think and act? If these doctrines
leave us untouched, which competing doctrine explains why and how

