206

CHAPTER 9

yet conceivable, and epistemically possible, world-states should be uncontroversial. First, since his argument fails to comes to grips with a
highly plausible Kripkean account of how knowledge of the actual is
sometimes required to determine the scope of the possible, it does not
establish its conclusion. Second, since it simply ignores the obvious
Kripkean account of the matter, it cannot provide any independent
objection to the orthodox Kripkean account of the necessary aposteriori. Thus, the entire force of Chalmers’s critique will have to rest on
the positive case he can make for his ambitious two-dimensionalist
reinterpretation of Kripke. This is signiﬁcant, since—as in the case
of Jackson—Chalmers’s two-dimensionalist semantic theory is both
highly programmatic and problematic in itself. It is motivated not by
the success of any careful and detailed semantic analyses, but by the
conviction that it provides the only possible explanation of the necessary aposteriori (and the contingent apriori) that is compatible with
what we know antecedently about modality and the nature of possible
world-states.
The roots of this conviction can, I think, be traced to the plausible
idea that there must be some connection between conceivability and
possibility. Although this idea is correct, in my opinion, Chalmers is too
quick to generalize from it. As a result, he comes to view conceivability
and possibility as coextensive, with the former being perhaps deﬁnitional of the latter. What he fails to see is that a signiﬁcant and illuminating link between the two can be preserved, even if one recognizes
the existence of world-states that are fully conceivable, and yet metaphysically impossible. It is, I think, because he fails to see this intermediate position that the only alternative he recognizes to the view that
conceivability and possibility (of world-states) come to essentially the
same thing is a view which distinguishes genuine metaphysical possibility from mere conceivability by imposing some entirely arbitrary constraints on the former over and above of those required by the latter. As
he puts it, “any claims about the added constraints of metaphysical possibility would seem to be a matter of arbitrary stipulation.”12
The central reason this is incorrect is, as I see it, that the objects of
conceivability—the things we conceive when trying to determine what
is metaphysically possible—are not simply world-states, but entire systems of metaphysical possibility, each with a designated “actual”
world-state and a space of related states, some of which are possible
12

The Conscious Mind, p. 137.

