232

CHAPTER 9

out to express a truth. (This is the “diagonal proposition” of Stalnaker 1978. Strictly speaking, it is a centered proposition, or a
function from centered worlds to truth values.) The secondary intensions yield a secondary proposition, which holds in those counterfactual circumstances in which the statement [sentence], as uttered in the actual world, is true. The secondary proposition is
Kaplan’s “content” of an utterance and is more commonly seen as
the proposition expressed by a statement [sentence], but the primary proposition is also central.
The two kinds of necessary truth of a statement [sentence]
correspond precisely to the necessity of the two kinds of associated proposition. A statement [sentence] is necessarily true in the
ﬁrst (a priori) sense if [iff] the associated primary proposition
holds in all centered possible worlds (that is, if the statement
would turn out to express a truth in any context of utterance). A
statement [sentence] is necessarily true in the a posteriori sense if
[iff] the associated secondary proposition holds in all possible
worlds (that is, if the statement as uttered in the actual world is
true in all counterfactual worlds).36
Clearly, the view Chalmers is working up to is one in which S is an instance of the necessary aposteriori iff the primary proposition associated
with S is contingent and knowable only aposteriori, while the secondary
proposition associated with S is necessary (and knowable apriori).
An Excursion into “Centered Worlds” and “Centered Propositions”

At this point, a word should be said about the “centered world-states”
and “centered propositions” mentioned in the above passage. A centered world-state is a world-state with the addition of a designated
agent and time to provide interpretations for I, we, now, and grammatically related expressions, when world-states function as contexts
of utterance. For example, the character of I is a function that maps a
context—i.e., a centered world-state—onto the designated agent of
that state, and the character of a sentence containing I—e.g., the character of I am so and so—is a function that maps a centered world-state
onto the proposition which attributes the property of being so and so
to the designated agent of that world-state. Since the designated agent
may change from context to context, I refers to different individuals,
36

Pages 63–64.

