L. Spagnesi

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 99 (2023) 1–9

Fig. 3. Kon and Lombrozo's experiment. The better rule is that SOMP ﬂowers have two concentric circles in their centres while THONT ﬂowers have one circle in their
centre. The worse rule is that the petals of SOMP ﬂowers are mostly one colour, whereas the petals of THONT ﬂowers are mostly rainbow coloured. The blue box
contains the items in the ideal scenario; the green box contains the items in the non-ideal scenario (see Kon & Lombrozo, 2018, p. 1941). Reproduced by permission
from Cognitive Science.

simple, exceptionless pattern describes some explanatory ideal that is
rarely realized, the pursuit of this ideal could spur meaningful discoveries” (Kon & Lombrozo, 2018, p. 1940). In their experiment (Fig. 3),
they asked participants to classify items into one of two categories. They
were prompted to ‘explain’ (by seeking an ideal rule) or simply write
down the category membership of twelve exemplars. Only two rules
could be used to categorize items in ideal and non-ideal world conditions:
an easy to ﬁnd ‘worse rule’ with a limited success rate in capturing
category membership, and a ‘better rule’ that was more difﬁcult to ﬁnd
but also more successful in categorizing items. Results suggested that
when prompted to identify ideal patterns, subjects were more likely to
identify the better rule of assortment than when operating without an
ideal assumption (in both ideal and, importantly for this paper, non-ideal
world conditions). The reason the authors identify for this phenomenon
is that idealizing supports discovery: idealized models give us a starting
point and a standard to ﬁnd and assess unregular and chaotic patterns in
a non-ideal world. I suggest that RI plays precisely this role in empirical
investigation and that Kant's account of science provides a philosophically rich framework for investigating idealization as a necessary condition of empirical discovery and explanation.

If this is correct, regulative idealization is compatible with and
beneﬁcial to realism, as I characterized it. For if truth is a necessary
component of realism (albeit not necessarily a sufﬁcient one), and
regulative idealizing provides both the conceptual space and the
normative standards to deepen factive explanation, it follows that regulative idealization also promotes the acquisition of truthful propositions
based on facts. As suggested by Rice (2016), it seems plausible to assess
the contribution of regulative idealization to truth as a global matter, so
that local employment of falsehoods can still have a positive effect on the
overall truth-balance, so to speak. My account adds some further qualiﬁcations to this line of thought. Since regulative idealizations are not
themselves parts of explanation, their being false does not count as ‘less
truth’ even at the local level of explanation. Further, since these idealizations play a constructive and normative role, they do not just promote
the mere maximization of truths, but rather the acquisition of epistemically justiﬁed and explanatorily relevant truthful propositions. As a
result, my account is amenable to views that qualify truth as part of the
aim of science or reconﬁgure such an aim in epistemic terms (see Bird,
2007).
The compatibility between regulative idealization and realism comes
with some caveats. I suggested that regulative idealizations are idealizations that cannot be replaced, and in virtue of not being replaceable
they offer an indirect, yet indispensable contribution to truth. A ﬁrst
caveat concerns how to practically identify indispensable regulative
idealizations. A useful criterion is to isolate those models that cannot be
made more accurate by adding correcting factors (as suggested by Morrison, 2015). But this would still be an insufﬁcient criterion for we cannot
exclude that a breakthrough in a certain ﬁeld makes more realistic
explanatory models available. Second, if we do not have a deﬁnitive
criterion of indispensability, some idealized models that we currently
deem necessary may turn out to be incompatible with realism. A
fully-ﬂedged account of the compatibility between regulative idealization and realism should answer complex questions about the evolution
and progress of science that I cannot address here. Let me brieﬂy suggest,
however, that, the lack of arguments for the absolute indispensability of
regulative idealization is to be expected. Scientiﬁc investigation is a
historical and situated endeavor. As far as we know, some idealized
models are necessary to get epistemic access to explanatorily valuable
information. We have no reason to think that we will dispense with them
in the future, although we cannot exclude this possibility. Importantly,
such a relativized notion of indispensability still allows us to maintain a
distinction between rules that, albeit replaceable in principle, currently
play an indispensable epistemic function (regulative idealizations) and
idealizations that ought to be de-idealized or corrected.
Finally, let me brieﬂy note that although the present proposal is
inspired from Kant's philosophy and his idiosyncratic account of science,
similar views have recently found support in psychological research. Kon
and Lombrozo have shown that ideals, although rarely (or not to be)
found in real scientiﬁc practice and everyday thinking, still play an
important role in explanation. Their research “suggests that even if a

8. Conclusion
I wish to conclude by clarifying the role of RI in the quest for scientiﬁc
truth. If the analysis so far is correct, these idealizations do not stand for
or describe real objects but are rather rules for the empirical investigation
of nature. This characterization has important implications. As a ‘rule’, an
idealization does not tell us what an object is—strictly speaking there is
no HWE equilibrium as there is, in Kant's philosophy of nature, no
existing “pure water” nor “fundamental power”—but rather tell us how
we ought to investigate empirical objects.
Although the rule itself is not an explanation, it imposes on cognizers
epistemic constraints on explanations through two steps. First, it gives a
set of phenomena a common referent point or starting point for explanation. This is the constructive function of idealization. Employing HWE
is the starting point for all population-genetical investigation. In Kantian
terms, it gives ‘systematic unity’ to our particular cognitions as a “focus
imaginarius”. Second, idealizations are not explanations of phenomena,
but rather normative standards for the assessment of explanations. It
would be misleading to say that HWE as such ‘explains’ anything. It
furnishes instead a standard to which we can compare collected data. By
doing so we further the unity and accuracy of our explanations. More
speciﬁcally, we identify cases where deviations are small and thereby do
not reject HWE, and cases that deeply challenge HWE and thus lead us to
new ﬁndings.
I submit that Kant is right in pointing out that idealizing is a condition
or a “touchstone” of truth —not because it gives ideal truths about a nonexistent world, but rather because it gives us rules on how to promote
investigation and look for more uniﬁed and accurate explanations. As
Kant puts it:
8

