L. Spagnesi

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 99 (2023) 1–9

Fig. 2. Asymptotic extrapolation according to Strevens (2019). Reproduced with permission from Springer Nature.

the effects of selection, linkage, mutation, inbreeding and chance can
be detected and estimated” (Mayo, 2008, p. 249). In other words,
when deviations from HWE are signiﬁcant and such deviations signal,
through a deﬁciency of either or both homozygotes, or of heterozygotes, etc., the type of explanation that should be sought (ibid., 254).
By using HWE as a standard for comparison, it is therefore possible to
detect and measure the forces that disrupt the equilibrium. Biologists
then elaborate more uniﬁed and accurate explanations of the results,
thereby deepening our understanding of genotypic frequencies in all
population-genetical investigation.27

them than mere elimination of irrelevant factors in the explanation—what is then the positive role of idealizations?
My claim is that idealizations play a positive role in science inasmuch
as they have—to use Kant's terminology—an essential regulative function. Idealizations are not to be conceived of as mere ﬁctions or as hypotheses. Rather, they are necessary rules governing the (i) construction
and (ii) assessment of scientiﬁc explanations. What does this mean in the
present context? Take the example of inﬁnite population idealization. I
think Strevens is right in pointing out that we must not presuppose an
actual inﬁnite population to construct this model—the idealized model is
rather derived through an asymptotic derivation. In Kantian terms, this
assumption is a “focus imaginarius” or imaginary standpoint towards
which our empirical ﬁndings are supposed to converge. But I think
Strevens undermines the function of such ideal standpoint by saying that
it just cancels out a factor from being explanatory relevant. The
assumption (as a mere rule) is precisely what creates the space where the
asymptotic approximation can take place. It is only by projecting an idea
of inﬁnite population that empirical, ﬁnite population can be said to
approximate to a unitary value of frequency at the increase of n. More
precisely, this happens through the following two steps:

The proposed view not only reconciles key insights coming from the
two dominant approaches to the problem of idealization, but it also advances recent, alternative attempts to explain the contribution of idealizations to factive understanding. Rice (2016) argues that idealizing
produces factive understanding in a variety of contextual ways, for
instance by providing modal information about counterfactual relevance.
Pincock (2023) interprets idealizations as having a non-representational
function that consists in signaling the commitment to the whole derivation of the explanation generated by the idealization via truths underlying it (i.e., the idealization is “partially true”). Finally, Lawler (2021)
proposes an “extraction” view according to which idealized models do
not ﬁgure in the content of our understanding but enable the extraction
of relevant information. These approaches are promising and contain
insightful analyses. In my opinion, however, they do not offer fully
satisfactory answers to two concerns. First, since they do not distinguish
between idealizations that can or cannot be true, they either attribute
descriptive power to idealizations that cannot be true (similarly to ﬁctionalists; as in Rice, 2016 and Pincock, 2023),28 or deny that any
idealization can ﬁgure into the content of the understanding (something
that is arguably justiﬁed with respect to idealizations that can be true,
such as approximations or simpliﬁed representations; as in Lawler,
2021). Second, the Kantian approach here proposed offers a determinate
answer to why and how some idealized models are epistemically valuable. Regulative idealization contributes to the way we obtain factive
understanding. And it does so in a speciﬁc way, by telling scientists how
to construct and improve explanations in different contexts. For this
reason, regulative idealizations are to be regarded as rules that are
indispensable to the extraction or derivation of factive explanations.29

(i) Construction. The introduction of the idealization has a ﬁrst
important result: it creates what Kant calls unity of cognitions. Instead
of an unruly heap of empirical results, biologists are provided with a
template that allows them to analyze gene and genotype frequencies
in all ﬁnite populations. That is clearly a positive role. The introduction of the inﬁnite population idealization grounds an ideal model
(HWE) that acts as the founding block and starting point of any
population genetics analysis. In other words, the introduction of the
idealization creates the domain within which biologists can construct
explanations of any ﬁnite population frequencies. On the other hand,
we should be wary of such ideal unity. To use, again, Kantian terminology, the unity grounded by idealizations can only be regulative.
As clearly recognized by biologists, HWE is not a law in any standard
(or, to stick to Kantian terms, ‘constitutive’) sense of the term. Even
when the expected values are conﬁrmed, this should be taken as nonrejection of HWE rather than a proof that a given locus really exhibits
HWE (see, e.g., Waples, 2015). HWE is instead a ‘rule’ giving us a
standard or canon that we can use to assess particular explanations.
(ii) Assessment. HWE does not give us ﬁxed results—it is rather a
reference point that biologists can use to compare empirical data. In
the simplest cases, HWE gives approximations that need to be tested
using the actual genotypic frequencies. Such conditions are realized
when all assumptions (including binomial sampling of gametes and
panmixia) are roughly met. The standard method consists in generating expected genotypic frequencies according to HWE and then
compare these with observed genotypic frequencies using a chisquare or related test (Waples, 2015). If no signiﬁcant deviation is
detected, the actual data are said to approximately follow HWE. But
crucially, this is not the main function of HWE. HWE gives rise to the
most important ﬁndings when it is used as a standard “against which

27
For an instructive illustration of the assessment procedure in HWE, see
Table I in Waples (2015). The table relates the observed deviations from the
equilibrium to a series of possible causes and explanations. For example, factors
that commonly produce deﬁciencies of heterozygotes are null alleles,
self-fertilization, the Wahlund effect and positive assortative mating (see ibid.,
p. 11).
28
By either presupposing that idealized models contain true modal information about the world (Rice, 2016) or that they are partially true (Pincock, 2023).
29
I am thankful to an anonymous reviewer for pushing me to clarify these
points.

7

