Relativism, Vagueness and What is Said

137

two-dimensional distinction of character and content, dependence of content
on context and of content’s truth-value on circumstance of evaluation; i.e., by
somehow or other ascribing to sentence radicals semantic values describable
by means of the two-dimensional matrices familiar from Stalnaker (1978).
These two-dimensional matrices provide in my view a good elaboration for
present purposes of Bach’s notion of locutionary saying. On this proposal, the
semantic content of a sentence radical is its full matrix; this is what we should
expect for STE systematically to deliver.¹² Notice for later use that, as Stalnaker
insists, they provide alternative propositions for sr-radicals to convey; in addition
to the ‘‘horizontal’’ propositions, there are now the ‘‘diagonal’’ propositions,
which, at least in some cases, allow for a reconstruction of Kripke’s distinction
between metaphysical and epistemic modalities—as in relatively uncontroversial
examples such as ‘(actually, ﬂuorite structure is a lattice) iff ﬂuorite structure is
a lattice’.¹³
Now, in spite of the indexicality of ‘I’ and ‘now’ revealed by (1) and (2), David
Lewis (1979) has notoriously proposed to deal with the phenomenon of what
Perry (1979) calls the ‘‘essential indexical’’ by in effect ascribing to sr-contents
a further relativity in the circumstances of evaluation than that required by
contingency. On the present characterization, Lewis’s proposal is to relativize the
truth of the sr-content for ‘I am hungry’ not just to worlds, but to individuals and
times too (i.e., their sr-contents are (two-dimensional) functions from centered
worlds to truth-values).¹⁴ These contents, unlike the traditional ones so far
considered, are not just generalizations specifying distributions of truth-values
over possible-worlds, but agents and times in addition; they are thus not just
possible-world neutral, but also ‘‘world-centre’’ neutral: the values of those
parameters are not supposed to be essential or constitutive of them. But still,
according to Lewis when one asserts them, what one asserts is the application
of those functions to oneself at the time of the assertion (in the world of one’s
assertion). The truth of assertions remains absolute.
This is as it should be: as in the contingency case, no unexpected case of
‘‘faultless disagreement’’ is perceived if A asserts ‘I am hungry’ and B asserts
‘I am not hungry’. If Lewis is right, B denies the very same sr-content that
A asserts, while what A asserts can be true, and so can what B asserts; but
there is no substantive faultless disagreement involved here. In the terms I am
proposing, the relativization posited by Lewis is moderate, because, in the end, it
¹² This is not strictly speaking correct, but it will do for present purposes. STE should also
provide some information about the conventional meanings of moods, as well as about conventional
implicatures or conventionally signaled presuppositions, and this cannot be accurately represented
merely by means of the two-dimensional matrices.
¹³ See García-Carpintero and Macià (2006).
¹⁴ Lewis only considers relativization to an individual, but this is because of his fourdimensionalism about material objects; on a three-dimensional view, his proposal would require the
further relativization, which is independently needed if ‘now’ creates similar problems.

