Margins for Error in Context

121

AK ¬(pi → ¬pi−1 ∧ ¬pi ∧ ¬pi+1 ), but not the translation (KME)∗ of (KME),
that is AK [AK ¬pi → (¬pi−1 ∧ ¬pi ∧ ¬pi+1 )].

5.3.3 Margins actualized
By showing the correspondence between K relative to CS and AK relative to the
standard two-dimensional semantics, it may seem we did not gain much. We
did gain an important insight, however, since the introduction of an actuality
operator shows that the problematic principles can be given a more articulated
formulation without giving rise to paradox. In this section, we present another
formulation of the margin principle using the actuality operator, which we call
(MEA): like (ME)∗ , (MEA) is logically equivalent to (ME) with respect to the
standard semantics and to CS; when embedded under the operator K , however,
(MEA) yields a modiﬁed version of (KME) that comes out valid in the model
of Figure 2.⁹ For ease of exposition, we only consider the upward version of the
margin for error principle in order to formulate (MEA):
(MEA) K ¬pi → A¬pi+1
(MEA) says that if I know that the pen is not i inches tall, then, it is actually the
case that the pen is not i + 1 inches tall. Since the actuality operator precedes an
atomic sentence, (MEA) has the same content as upward (ME). When embedded
under K , however, the principle is likely to express something different from the
upward version of (KME), namely:
(KMEA)

K (K ¬pi → A¬pi+1 )

(KMEA) says that in all my epistemic alternatives, if I know there that pi is false,
then pi+1 is actually false. Note that (KMEA) is much weaker than (KME)—even
though, as we just said, (MEA) and (ME) equivalent. The reason is that, with
(KME), the information ¬pi+1 holds at all our epistemic alternatives in which
the consequent K ¬pi is satisﬁed. By contrast, in (KMEA) the information ¬pi+1
is no longer referred to the epistemic alternatives, since the actuality operator
semantically extracts it from the scope of the operator K . The phenomenon is
exactly analogous to the fact that, by contrast to an anaphoric pronoun like ‘‘he’’,
an indexical pronoun like ‘‘I’’ cannot be bound by the attitude-holder when
embedded under an attitude operator: while ‘‘he’’ in ‘‘John thinks he is right’’
⁹ To complete the picture, one should also consider the formulation of upward (ME) in which
both antecedent and consequent are preﬁxed with an actuality operator, namely: AK ¬pi → A¬pi+1 ,
which we may call (AMEA). We only focus on (MEA), however, because (MEA) and (AMEA), and
their respective K -preﬁxed versions, are equivalent in the framework of CS.

