56

Communication

a plausible answer, in the form of an explicit linguistic paraphrase, to the
question, what does she mean? Could she have achieved the same
communicative effect by speaking? Clearly not.
Examples like the one of Mary smelling gas, where it is reasonable to
impute a meaning to the communicator, are the only ones normally
considered in discussions of communication; examples like the one of
Mary at the seaside - clearly communicating, but what? — are generally
ignored. Yet these examples do not belong to distinct classes of
phenomena, and it is easy enough to imagine intermediate cases: say, a
guest sniffing appreciatively and ostensively wh^n the stew is brought to
the table, etc.
The distortions and misperceptions introduced by the explicit com¬
munication model are also found in the study of verbal communication
itself. Some essential aspects of implicit verbal communication are
overlooked. Pragmatists assume that what is communicated by an
utterance is a speaker’s meaning, which in the case of an assertion is a set of
assumptions. One of these assumptions is explicitly expressed; the others
(if any) are implicitly conveyed, or implicated. The only difference
between the explicit content of an utterance and its implicatures is
supposed to be that the explicit content is decoded, while the implicatures
are inferred. Now we all know, as speakers and hearers, that what is
implicitly conveyed by an utterance is generally much vaguer than what is
explicitly expressed, and that when the implicit import of an utterance is
explicitly spelled out, it tends to be distorted by the elimination of this
often intentional vagueness. The distortion is even greater in the case of
metaphor and other figures of speech, whose poetic effects are generally
destroyed by being explicitly spelled out.
In an effort to minimise the distortion, pragmatists have tended to focus
on examples such as (32), where the implicit import is fairly precise, and
to ignore equally ordinary cases of implicit vagueness such as (51):
(32) Peter: Do you want some coffee?
Mary-.Coiitt would keep me awake.
(51) Peter: What do you intend to do today?
Mary: I have a terrible headache.
In (32), Mary implicates that she doesn’t want coffee (or, in some
circumstances, that she does) and that her reason for not wanting it is that
it would keep her awake. Here the implicatures can be spelled out without
distortion. In (51), what does Mary implicate? That she will not do
anything? That she will do as little as possible? That she will do as much as
she can? That she does not yet know what she will do? There is no precise
assumption, apart from the one explicitly expressed, which she can be said

