270

Postface

We can thus make the following generalisation. Take a set of stimuli
that meet the following conditions: any of them would be likely to
communicate what the communicator wants to communicate; she
is capable of producing any of them; and she has no preferences
among them, apart from wanting to choose the one that will be most
effective in achieving her communicative goal. These stimuli may differ
in terms of the effort demanded of the addressee, the effects achieved,
or both effect and effort. The communicator should choose the stimulus
that appears most relevant to the addressee, since this will make
her communication most likely to succeed? For the same reason, she
should appear to be choosing the stimulus that is most relevant to the
addressee. In normal conditions, appearance and reality are likely to
coincide.
The communicator’s choice of ostensive stimuli is limited not only by
her preferences but by her abilities. On the effort side, there may be
stimuli that would be easier for the hearer to process, but that the
communicator is unable to think of at the time, as when the best
formulation of some thought just fails to come to mind. On the effect
side, the limits on the communicator’s abilities are even more significant.
There may always be information that the hearer would find more
relevant than anything the communicator has to offer. She cannot be
more relevant than her own knowledge permits. If she decides to
communicate in bad faith, and tries to make manifest assumptions that
she does not believe, she would still want the addressee to think that
what she is trying to communicate is warranted by what she knows.
Again, there is no principled asymmetry between effect and effort.
The presumption is that, of all the stimuli that are available to her and
acceptable as a means of achieving her particular communicative goal,
the communicator will choose one that is as relevant as possible to the
addressee. The second clause of the presumption of relevance can be
made both simpler and more general, as follows:
(11) The ostensive stimulus is the most relevant one compatible with
the communicator’s abilities and preferences.
We now have a fully revised presumption of optimal relevance:
(12) Presumption of optimal relevance (revised)
(a) The ostensive stimulus is relevant enough for it to be worth the
addressee’s effort to process it.
(b) The ostensive stimulus is the most relevant one compatible
with the communicator’s abilities and preferences.
This says that the addressee is entitled to expect a level of relevance high
enough to warrant his attending to the stimulus, and which is, moreover.

