Teaching Philosophy, 15:2, June 1992

121

Rethinking the Teaching of Philosophy
KONSTANTIN KOLENDA
Rice University
Recent questioning of traditional philosophy has a wider basis than that
provided in Richard Rorty’s writings, even though he is sometimes (mis­
leadingly) credited with having initiated a widespread soul-searching
among contemporary philosophers. In the first part of this paper, I shall
characterize the main features of this questioning and point to its wider
sources. The chief criticism of the tradition is that it unwarrantedly con­
fines philosophy, and its teaching, to what I call a “realist mode.” Agree­
ing that this criticism has validity, I suggest, in the second part of the
paper, how the teaching of philosophy may be modified to overcome the
traditional bias. The recommendation proceeds from the assumption that
a historicist approach, combined with the acknowledgement of the cen­
trality of language, would put the teaching of philosophy on a sounder
track. As I shall claim in the final section, among the benefits of this
change, already observable in many current professional and pedagogical
activities of philosophers, will be an extension of philosophical thought to
other cultural areas. By letting go of the (mistaken) idea that philosophy
has access to special facts and concepts indigenous to its own domain,
philosophers, both as practitioners and as teachers, are likely to play a
more useful role in the intellectual life of our culture.
The Realist Mode
When Richard Rorty suggested a distinction between philosophy and
Philosophy, many of his readers took this suggestion as advocating an end
to philosophical thinking.1 Nothing could be further from the truth. The
thrust of his criticism of the dominance of epistemology in the history of
philosophy was to call into question the traditional tendency to philoso­
phize in what could be called a “realist mode.” Philosophers were ob­
sessed with the idea that it is their task to find the key to the Heart of
Reality, to describe the World As It Really Is, to discover the Nature of
Things, to lay bare Reality’s Own Language, to fathom the Essence of
Everything, to find out what things look like from God’s Point of View. It
is that ambition that elevated epistemology to such a prominent status,
°Teaching Philosophy, 1992. All rights reserved. 0145-5788/92/1502-0121$1.00

