10

Neal A. Lester

Until humans develop and witness the skills of observation, of human connection, of a
willingness to care about what another human is experiencing, imagination does absolutely
nothing to demonstrate and manifest human ties. In the film version of the John Grisham’s
novel A Time to Kill, which recounts the rape of a young Black girl, the white defense attorney
(played by Matthew McConaughey) uses an imagination strategy to get the mostly white
jury – and largely white film audience – to care about the little girl and her father, who is on
trial for killing the two white rapists:27
Now I wanna tell you a story. I’m gonna ask y’all to close your eyes while I tell you this
story. I want you to listen to me. I want you to listen to yourselves. Go ahead. Close your
eyes, please.
This is a story about a little girl walking home from the grocery store one sunny
afternoon. I want you to picture this little girl.
Suddenly a truck races up. Two men jump out and grab her. They drag her into a nearby
field, tie her up, and they rip her clothes from her body. Now they climb on, first one
then the other, raping her, shattering everything innocent and pure – vicious thrusts –
in a fog of drunken breath and sweat. And when they’re done, after they killed her tiny
womb, murdered any chance for her to bear children, to have life beyond her own, they
decide to use her for target practice. So, they start throwing full beer cans at her. They
throw ’em so hard that it tears the flesh all the way to her bones – and they urinate
on her.
Now comes the hanging. They have a rope; they tie a noose. Imagine the noose pulling
tight around her neck and a sudden blinding jerk. She’s pulled into the air and her feet
and legs go kicking and they don’t find the ground. The hanging branch isn’t strong
enough. It snaps and she falls back to the earth. So, they pick her up, throw her in the
back of the truck, and drive out to Foggy Creek Bridge and pitch her over the edge. And
she drops some 30 feet down to the creek bottom below.
Can you see her? Her raped, beaten, broken body, soaked in their urine, soaked in their
semen, soaked in her blood – left to die.
Can you see her? I want you to picture that little girl.
Now imagine she’s white.28
That McConaughey’s character ends the scene by asking the jurors to “imagine she’s
white” suggests that only when we can imagine an experience as our own or close to our
own does another’s experience even matter to us. In another demonstration of consciously
refusing to disrupt systemic racism against Black people, anti-racist educator Jane Elliot –
author of the famous Blue Eyes/Brown Eyes social exercise with white Iowa third-graders
to teach a lesson about the arbitrariness of U.S. racism and white privilege immediately
after the 1968 assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. – offered to her 19 September
1995 Chapman University (Orange, CA) white lecture audience this Black/white race
proposition:
27
28

Grisham 1989.
Schumacher 1996.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. 10 Mar 2025 at 04:04:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use.

