68

L. Ji

present versus the view from the past itself. They all need to be taken into
consideration and combined in fruitful ways. Otherwise, bad consequences might
arise.
I hope that these obvious points can be relevant and interesting to others too. As
in life, people often overlook the most basic and obvious things. We will make
some of the above discussions more precise and describe a few more concrete
points which might be considered as basic requirements in doing research on the
history of mathematics. Whenever possible, relevant examples are provided. After
summarizing comments by mathematicians and historians on various aspects of
history in Sect. 3.2, we examine some historical studies on Galois’ testamentary
letter to highlight the importance of using the primary sources in Sect. 3.3. Then in
Sect. 3.4, we explain the key components of historical thinking. Finally we introduce
the notion of spacetime of mathematics in Sect. 5 and illustrate its use to get new
perspectives on works of Poincaré and Hilbert.

3.2 Comments by Mathematicians and Historians
on What, Why, How of History
Given that the history of mathematics is a long one, it is expected that some major
mathematicians and historians of mathematics have written about several basic
issues in the study of the history of mathematics. It is not surprising that each has
different perspectives and some of them have expressed their opinions strongly and
sharply. It is not surprising either that mathematicians and historians of mathematics
have vastly different or even seemingly conflicting opinions. Similarly, even for
some historians of mathematics, there is a strong division between the so-called
internal history and external history, though this division is not clearly defined.
From the dialectic perspective emphasized in this chapter, we will try to present
an overview of them by making long quotes from major representatives so that the
readers can understand better the precise meaning of opinions of the people from
whom we have quoted.10
geometry richer and more interesting. More importantly, they can also explain why something
happened in the ways it did.
10 It seems that the general advice given to young historians in books on the methodology of
history is to quote sparingly or briefly by incorporating others’ opinions into the text through either
summarizing or paraphrasing others’ writings. In this chapter, I am going against this instruction
because short quotes and paraphrasing will often distort the original meanings and hence can
cause misunderstanding, which can be seen in the discussions about Galois’ testamentary letter
in Sect. 3.3 below. This is also consistent with the basic principle in the study of history of using
the primary sources or the original writings as much as possible. I do not wish to express my
opinions either on these quotes representing different perspectives about history, since it seems
important that the readers need to understand all of them and then make up their own decisions
about the basic issues in the history of mathematics and how to make use of the suggestions in the
quotes. Of course, this is the dialectic view that we want to emphasize in this chapter.

