394 Wittgenstein

in the last chapter, namely that a world which at the level of the elementary
propositions has no discernible regularity might at another level of description
(i.e. with the right shape of mesh) appear to be regular. In much the same way we
might suspect that evaluative terms are emergent, i.e. they get a grip on the world
only at higher level of description and are not practically reducible to elementary
propositions.
One plausible source for Wittgenstein’s view that individual facts are not in
themselves good or bad is Russell.
Good and bad . . . are the reflections of our own emotions on other things,
not part of the substance of things as they are in themselves. And therefore
an impartial contemplation, freed from all preoccupation with Self, will
not judge things good or bad, although it is very easily combined with that
feeling of universal love which leads the mystic to say that the whole world
is good. (CPBR, VIII, 46)
Russell here made the same slide as Wittgenstein from saying that good and bad
‘are not part of the substance of things as they are in themselves’ to the conclusion
that ‘an impartial contemplation’ will withhold judgment from particular facts
entirely.

The willing subject
The problem Wittgenstein set himself in July 1916 was to explain how the world
as a whole could have a value that does not reside in the individual facts that make
it up. His solution, in outline, was that value lies not in the world itself but in how
it is viewed. The world of the happy differs from that of the unhappy, although
the facts are the same, because the happy view it in the right spirit. (Here the
word glücklich might be better translated ‘fortunate’ or even ‘blessed’ instead of
‘happy’.)
This is only an outline, however, and it immediately invites the further question, who is it who is doing the viewing? In the 1916 notebook Wittgenstein was
at first tempted to answer this question by conceiving of another entity standing
outside the world which he called the willing subject. But how does willing differ
from mere wanting? He attempted to understand this by analogy with someone
who is paralysed, but he made little headway because his claim that the world is
independent of my will made the willing subject seem too like a passive spectator
on the passing show. He therefore began instead to think of the will as accompanying worldly events so as to convert them into acts and hence give them moral
significance. This led him to the view (in which more than a hint of Schopenhauer’s influence is detectable) that every worldly fact—the motion of distant stars
just as much as of my hand as I write this sentence—is (unsayably) accompanied
by willing, so as to give it moral significance.
If we conceive of willing as thus giving value to worldly events, however, this
cannot be in the ‘popular sense’, in which ‘there are things that I do, and other

