This is the author's accepted manuscript without copyediting, formatting, or final corrections. It will be published in its final form in an upcoming issue of The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, published by The University of Chicago Press on behalf of The British Society for the Philosophy of Science.
Include the DOI when citing or quoting: https://doi.org/10.1086/728261. Copyright 2023 The British Society for the Philosophy of Science.

Relative Significance Controversies in Evolutionary Biology

Notice how this description adds nuance to what is at stake in the controversy concerning
allopatric and sympatric speciation. When doubt was cast on whether sympatric speciation
ever occurred in nature or was merely a theoretical possibility, the theorists involved were
inquiring about whether (or how often) selective pressures could be strong enough for subpopulations to evolve and become reproductively isolated from one another. In other words,
this controversy began with researchers asking a frequency question, which then shifted to
researchers asking about the causal mechanisms that generated sympatric speciation events.
This led to another shift: how often are the mechanisms of sympatric speciation causally
efficacious?10 Although I will delve into this more in sections 3 and 4, the answer to this
question is more substantive than the answer to how often speciation events are the result of
a geographic barrier. It also becomes far more understandable why this debate seems meaningful and important to evolutionary biologists who have engaged in it.
The controversy involving the evolution of dispersal patterns also seems better framed as
a blend of frequency and efficacy questions although it did not start out that way. In reflecting on previous work on the evolution of dispersal patterns, Dobson and Jones ([1985]) argue
that previous investigators mistakenly concluded that dispersal patterns must have evolved
because of a single cause. These theorists generalized from their data to conclude that ‘the
major cause of natal dispersal […] among mammals is competition […] and the “inbreeding
hypothesis” is both inadequate and unnecessary to explain general dispersal patterns’
(Moore and Ali [1984], p. 107). This claim suggests that initially, Moore and Ali took the
evolution of dispersal patterns to be a relative frequency controversy; an observed dispersal
pattern could be explained by one of three causes and to make a general claim about mammalian dispersal patterns, one simply needed to count up the cases. In response, Dobson and
Jones ([1985], p. 855) argue that this approach is mistaken, as these hypotheses ‘are not
exclusive […] Even if one cause is of primary importance in some species, other factors may
contribute to the magnitude of dispersal’. Thus, they are interested in efficacy claims. However, Dobson and Jones are still in the business of making general claims about dispersal

10

Dietrich’s ([2020]) observation that the positions of scientists (often) change in both subtle and more radical
ways as the relative significance controversy extends over time is complementary to the view I defend here—
that the question at the heart of the controversy can shift.

