Jean Jacques Rousseau

Christopher Bertram

the collective and a result of its deliberations, and a property of the
individual insofar as the individual identifies as a member of the
collective. In a well-ordered society, there is no tension between private
and general will, as individuals accept that both justice and their individual
self-interest require their submission to a law which safeguards their
freedom by protecting them from the private violence and personal
domination that would otherwise hold sway. In practice, however,
Rousseau believes that many societies will fail to have this well-ordered
character. One way in which they can fail is if private individuals are
insufficiently enlightened or virtuous and therefore refuse to accept the
restrictions on their own conduct which the collective interest requires.
Another mode of political failure arises where the political community is
differentiated into factions (perhaps based on a class division between rich
and poor) and where one faction can impose its collective will on the state
as a whole.

which his figure of the legislator is one supposed solution. As a believer in
the plasticity of human nature, Rousseau holds that good laws make for
good citizens. However, he also believes both that good laws can only be
willed by good citizens and that, in order to be legitimate, they must be
agreed upon by the assembly. This puts him in some difficulty, as it is
unlikely that the citizens who come together to form a new state will have
the moral qualities required to will good laws, as those citizens will have
been psychologically shaped by unjust institutions. The legislator
therefore has the function of inspiring a sense of collective identity in the
new citizens that allows them to identify with the whole and be moved to
support legislation that will eventually transform them and their children
into good citizens. In this story, however, the new citizens at first lack the
capacity to discern the good reasons that support the new laws and the
lawgiver has to persuade them by non-rational means to legislate in their
own best interests.

The Social Contract harbors a further tension between two accounts of
how the general will emerges and its relation to the private wills of
citizens. Sometimes Rousseau favors a procedural story according to
which the individual contemplation of self interest (subject to the
constraints of generality and universality and under propitious sociological
background conditions such as rough equality and cultural similarity) will
result in the emergence of the general will from the assembly of citizens
(see Sreenivasan 2000). In this account of the emergence of the general
will, there seems to be no special need for citizens to have any specifically
moral qualities: the constraints on their choice should be enough.
However, Rousseau also clearly believes that the mere contemplation of
self interest would be inadequate to generate a general will. This may
partly concern issues of compliance, since selfish citizens who can will the
general will might still not be moved to obey it. But Rousseau also seems
to believe that citizen virtue is a necessary condition for the emergence of
the general will in the first place. This presents him with a problem for

The figure of the legislator is a puzzle. Like the tutor in Emile, the
legislator has the role of manipulating the desires of his charges, giving
them the illusion of free choice without its substance. Little wonder then
that many critics have seen these characters in a somewhat sinister light.
In both cases there is a mystery concerning where the educator figure
comes from and how he could have acquired the knowledge and virtue
necessary to perform his role. This, in turn, raises a problem of regress. If
the legislator was formed by a just society, then who performed the
legislator’s role for that society, and how was that legislator formed? How
did the tutor acquire his education if not from a tutor who, in turn, was
educated according to Rousseau’s program by an earlier tutor? At least in
the case of the legislator, Rousseau might point to some actual historical
examples such as the Spartan, Lycurgus, to argue that the idea is not
entirely divorced from reality, but this seems a weak straw to clutch at.

16

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Summer 2024 Edition

17

