Jean Jacques Rousseau

Christopher Bertram

presentation of amour propre in the Discourse on Inequality—and
especially in his note XV to that work—often suggests that Rousseau sees
it as a wholly negative passion and the source of all evil. Interpretations of
amour propre centered on the Discourse on Inequality (which, historically,
are the most common ones (for example Charvet 1974)), often focus on
the fact that the need for recognition always has a comparative aspect, so
that individuals are not content merely that others acknowledge their
value, but also seek to be esteemed as superior to them. This aspect of our
nature then creates conflict as people try to exact this recognition from
others or react with anger and resentment when it is denied to them. More
recent readings of both the Discourse on Inequality, and especially of
Emile, have indicated that a more balanced view is possible (Dent 1988,
Neuhouser 2008, but see McLendon 2019 for pushback). According to
these interpretations, amour propre is both the cause of humanity’s fall as
well as the promise of its redemption because of the way in which it
develops humans’ rational capacities and their sense of themselves as
social creatures among others. Although Rousseau held that the
overwhelming tendency, socially and historically, is for amour propre to
take on toxic and self-defeating (‘inflamed’) forms, he also held that there
are, at least in principle, ways of organizing social life and individual
education that allow it to take on a benign character. This project of
containing and harnessing amour propre finds expression in both The
Social Contract and Emile. In some works, such as the Second Discourse,
Rousseau presents amour propre as a passion that is quite distinct from
amour de soi. In others, including Emile, he presents it as a form that
amour de soi takes in a social environment. The latter is consistent with
his view in Emile that all the passions are outgrowths or developments of
amour de soi.

beings. In the Discourse on Inequality, Rousseau traces the growth of
agriculture and metallurgy and the first establishment of private property,
together with the emergence of inequality between those who own land
and those who do not. In an unequal society, human beings who need both
the social good of recognition and such material goods as food, warmth,
etc. become enmeshed in social relations that are inimical both to their
freedom and to their sense of self worth. Subordinates need superiors in
order to have access to the means of life; superiors need subordinates to
work for them and also to give them the recognition they crave. In such a
structure there is a clear incentive for people to misrepresent their true
beliefs and desires in order to attain their ends. Thus, even those who
receive the apparent love and adulation of their inferiors cannot thereby
find satisfaction for their amour propre. This trope of misrepresentation
and frustration receives its clearest treatment in Rousseau’s account of the
figure of the European minister, towards the end of the Discourse on
Inequality, a figure whose need to flatter others in order to secure his own
wants leads to his alienation from his own self.

Although amour propre has its origins in sexual competition and
comparison within small societies, it does not achieve its full toxicity until
it is combined with a growth in material interdependence among human

10

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

2.1 Morality
Amour de soi, amour propre and pitié are not the full complement of
passions in Rousseau’s thinking. Once people have achieved
consciousness of themselves as social beings, morality also becomes
possible and this relies on the further faculty of conscience. The fullest
accounts of Rousseau’s conception of morality are found in the Lettres
Morales and in sections of the Confession of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar,
a part of Emile. In the most primitive forms of human existence, before the
emergence of amour propre, pitié balances or restrains self-interest. It is,
to that extent, akin to a moral sentiment such as Humean sympathy. But as
something that is merely instinctual it lacks, for Rousseau, a genuinely
moral quality. Genuine morality, on the other hand, consists in the
application of reason to human affairs and conduct. This requires the

Summer 2024 Edition

11

