Rudolf Carnap

puzzlement about physical phenomena and scientific imaginings. Acquiescing in a discourse
while simultaneously questioning its legitimacy is methodologically suspicious: if there is suffi­
cient comfort with such discourse to deploy it in one’s theorizing, why the initial fuss?
The basic point is that Carnap’s pragmatist/expressivist theory appears to suffer from circu­
larity. But there are many forms of circularity, not equally pernicious; the fact that Carnap is
unable to exit ontological discourse while theorizing about it might or might not constitute a
fatal flaw. (See Humberstone 1997; Keefe 2002).

No return
Carnap faces yet another puzzle – one that arises in connection with any implementation of
expressivism, whatever the target discourse. It turns upon the fact that participants in a practice
might feel undermined by the irrealist explanation of what they are up to and thus, once
informed, be unable to return to their practice in good faith, going on as before. Some explana­
tions destabilize that which they purport to explain. Thus: No Return.
Christine Korsgaard, reflecting upon Bernard Mandeville’s ironic assertion “that virtue is just
an invention of politicians, used to keep their human cattle in line,” notes that
The trouble with a view like Mandeville’s is not that it is not a reasonable explanation
of how moral practices came about, but rather that our commitment to these practices
would not survive our belief that it was true. Why give up your heart’s desire, just
because some politician wants to keep you in line?
(Korsgaard 1996, 9)
Korsgaard’s concern is applicable to any irrealist explanation: participants in a practice might
find certain explanations of what they are doing so disruptive that their willingness (or ability)
to go on doing it is undermined. To this extent, irrealist explanation suffers from an essential
instability. If the ontologist, having learned of Carnap’s pragmatist/expressivist explanation of
her practice, says “Well, if that’s what I’m doing when I engage in ontology, I’m not sure I want
to continue doing it,” then it’s not clear whether the irrealist explanation should be retained –
even if it predicts and explains its own rejection.
Cases differ. Perhaps a zealous Freudian therapist, having informed his patient of what’s really
happening, stands prepared for militant resistance to his explanations, and stands equipped with
a robust Freudian explanation of the patient’s resistance to his Freudian explanation. An ade­
quate theory of a practice should pack the resources to explain why the theory might be rejected
by practitioners. But this might not be a helpful analogy to all cases.
The sting of this concern depends upon whether Carnap intends his theory of ontology to be
conservative: that is, consistent with continued participation in the practice of ontology. But if so,
it is not obvious that such conservativism can be sustained. We all know of reflective moralizers
who, upon reading Ayer, Stevenson, or Hare, say “Well, if THAT’S what I’m doing when I
moralize, then I had better stop, because I don’t like doing that.” Some noncognitivists regard
this as no refutation of their theory. On the other hand, the informed moralizer might remain on
track, accepting the noncognitivist explanation and saying “Very well; in moralizing I am gilding
and staining with colors borrowed from my internal sentiments. I shall continue the practice as
before; it’s for a good cause.” Responses – including disruptions – might vary. It is an empirical
question whether a reflective participant in a given practice can or will, upon learning that theo­
rists explain his activities in expressivist terms (for example), continue to participate as before.
And it is not clear how this bears upon the plausibility of expressivism as a semantic theory.
45

