Rudolf Carnap

For present purposes, the point is that any pragmatic cost-benefit analysis of “the system of thing
properties” must acknowledge not only that quantification over second-order variables brings
immense increase in expressive power, but that additional, perhaps unwanted complexities arise.
If the monadic second-order variables range over sets, questions arise as to whether they range
over the full power set of the specified domain: if so – i.e., if the semantics deploys full models
containing all subsets of the first-order domain – then completeness fails, compactness fails, and
Lowenheim-Skolem fails. There is no sound and complete proof system for second-order logic.
Moreover decisions must be made about the form of a comprehension scheme: i.e., whether
every open higher-order sentence specifies a property or whether type restrictions apply.
And the complexities do not end here. If sufficiently ambitious we might wish to explore
Second Order Number Theory – that is, the theory of the integers together with all sets of
integers; questions then arise which are not solvable from ZFC. One solution is to add axioms;
but choice of axioms is notoriously complex and delicate (see Woodin 2001).
Perhaps such complexities are not prohibitive (depending upon one’s goals); but clearly the
decision to adopt a linguistic framework which requires a higher-order logic has strings attached;
adoption of linguistic frameworks is serious business.
Carnap tells us that “the philosophical statement of the reality of properties – a special case
of the thesis of the reality of universals – is devoid of cognitive content.” He does not claim the
statement to be devoid of meaning simpliciter: cognitive content is not the only kind of meaning
there is. He seeks to illuminate the role of the ontological question “Do universals exist?” in a
new light – one which involves
a practical, rather than a theoretical question; it is the question of whether or not to
accept the new linguistic forms. The acceptance cannot be judged as being either true
or false because it is not an assertion. It can only be judged as being more or less expe­
dient, fruitful, conducive to the aim for which the language is intended.
(Carnap 1950, 214)
Whether any gain in understanding is achieved by explaining ontological practice in terms of
pragmatic utility rather than representation of facts and accurate description of reality is not to
be adjudicated here; the current task is to articulate Carnap’s view, not to evaluate it. But it is
clear that Carnap’s conception of ontology does not portray it as shallow or easy: to portray
ontological conflict as a clash of commitments rather than a clash of beliefs is not to patronize,
minimize, or deflate it: it is simply to relocate it on the map of human endeavor, one likely to
be friendlier to empiricist constraints.
This highlights the pragmatist aspect of Carnap’s conception of ontological dispute. The
expressivist aspect must now be discussed.
Not all philosophical illumination takes the form of reductive analysis, meaning equivalence,
or translational paraphrase. In some cases it suffices to have an explanation of “what’s going on”
when we think or talk in certain ways. Consider emotivist theories of moral discourse: such
theories do not purport to translate moral claims into claims about sentiments; the claim, rather,
is that moral judgments serve to express sentiments, manifest attitudes, or articulate commit­
ments. Emotivism is a paradigm case of an irrealist or nondescriptivist theory, according to
which some region of commitment (in this case, moral-evaluative discourse) is portrayed as a
non-fact-stating mechanism that serves some vital, nondescriptive purpose. Such a theory might
or might not be satisfactory: it might not accommodate various aspects of moral discourse. More
sophisticated variants of such an approach are provided by Allan Gibbard’s norm expressivism,
Simon Blackburn’s projectivism, and other such “irrealist” theories.5
41

