Modal conventionalism

A.J. Ayer (1936: 31) gives a representative statement of this thought: “I allow [logical and
mathematical truths] to be necessary and certain only because they are analytic . . . The reason
why these propositions cannot be confuted in experience is that they do not make any assertion about the empirical world.” But here is a worry about Ayer’s thought. Grant that Ayer has
given us a conventionalist explanation of the necessity of analytic truths. What is the explanation of the contingency of synthetic truths? Ayer says that analytic truths cannot be confuted in
experience because they do not make assertions about the empirical world. The presumption
seems to be that synthetic propositions can be confuted in experience, because they do say
something about the empirical world. But why does S saying something about the empirical
world suffice to ensure that S could be confuted in experience? That follows only if we assume
that our experiences could have been otherwise, so as to confirm a different set of synthetic
claims. On the face of it, then, this sounds like there is some worldly modality: namely, contingency.That while the necessity of analytic truths is explained by their not saying anything about
the world, the contingency of synthetic truths is explained by the fact that they do say something about the world, and that our worldly experiences really could have been different. Now,
it is a perfectly coherent view to say that contingency is a worldly phenomenon, but that necessity is not. The idea being that contingency is the default – the world itself could always have
been otherwise – and that necessity arises only when truths are somehow exempt from the
tribunal of worldly experience; as Ayer puts it, by not making an assertion about the empirical
world. But while this is a consistent position, it is not obviously compatible with the original
motivations for conventionalism. For just as it is puzzling how the way things are could render
a truth necessary, so is it puzzling how the way things are could render some falsehood possible.
Just as we only appear to experience things being the case and not their necessarily being the
case, so it is that we do not appear to experience something’s merely possibly being the case.
The motivations that push us in the direction of seeing necessity as a linguistic rather than a
worldly phenomenon seemingly push us in the direction of seeing all modality as a nonworldly phenomenon.
Of course, one could attempt to give a conventionalist account of this contingency: we could
say that the only sense in which synthetic truths could have been confuted in experience – the
only sense in which our experiences could have been other than they are – is that our linguistic
conventions don’t rule out our having such alternative experiences. But is this satisfying?
Contingency has consequences, for our intellectual and practical endeavors. It is not worth
investigating whether there are any female bachelors, nor would it be rational to plan on there
being such, because that is not a way things could be: female bachelors are impossible. By contrast, it is worth discovering whether I have female students, and planning on that eventuality,
because this is a way things might be.2 But if all there is to contingency is not being ruled out
by convention, why should contingency matter so? The text of Pride and Prejudice doesn’t rule
out my having female students, but this doesn’t give me any reason at all to plan on that eventuality.Why would not being ruled out by linguistic convention give me such a reason? The text
of Pride and Prejudice and our linguistic conventions don’t rule out my having female students for
pretty much the same reason: they simply don’t speak to the issue. Pride and Prejudice is not at all
about the gender of my students, and neither are our linguistic conventions. What relevance,
then, could the fact that they don’t rule out this scenario – a scenario they are simply silent
about – have as to whether it is a scenario worth investigating and planning for? Not being ruled
out by convention only seems modally relevant if there is genuine worldly contingency that all
synthetic claims are susceptible to, and that necessary truths are only not susceptible to because
their being true by convention means that they are not saying anything about the world, and
thus are not sensitive to the genuinely contingent ways the world is.
137

