PUSHING THE LIMITS OF SCIENCE

153

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/58964 by guest on 16 November 2024

There are because our descriptions of phenomena are abstract and not testable
when theorising about superstrings and multiple universes. Are there limits to
palaeontology? There are since we can only investigate and reconstruct those
past forms of life on earth for which fossils remain. Are there limits to cognitive
science? There are given that we cannot recreate the origin of the mind or the
evolution of consciousness, language and altruistic behaviour, and we study
the mind from a self-referential point of view using our mind. Are there limits
to cosmology? There are due to insufficient empirical data and a point of reference for events prior to the big bang. Are there limits to comparative biology?
There are as we do not have systematic means of studying how other animals, with different sensory and cognitive abilities, perceive us and the world.
There are limits to what we can predict across science, such as predicting well
complex phenomena like ecosystems, economies and human behaviour.
Establishing major new fields that are as foundational as physics, chemistry
and biology is also improbable—just like we are today not going to come
across major new mountain ranges and rivers on our planet. Groundbreaking
advances that generate a new basis for a major field are likely to decrease over
time. Yet we will still generate new major breakthroughs and open smaller
fields especially related to the range of phenomena on our planet. But much
more is unknown beyond our planet and solar system. Is our universe finite
or infinite? Do other intelligent beings exist beyond our solar system? Would
different physical principles apply on different planets? Would different
mechanisms of evolution exist for their species? Answers to such questions
are currently beyond our methodological reach. For now, nearly all of science
is based on a single dataset, our own planet, and its particular ecosystem,
characteristics and evolutionary processes. This dataset basically accounts for
our entire body of knowledge about the world. Coming across other species on
other planets and galaxies and being able to conduct experiments there would
be a big revelation for science—to be able to test, compare and update our best
theories about the world. Science itself would no longer have just one experimental group but entirely new experimental and control groups (other planets
and galaxies). Some knowledge we have acquired up to now would become
more robust, if the evidence would be the same for physical phenomena and
species on other planets, while other knowledge would need to be revised.
A paradox of science is that each advance brings us into deeper complexities that are presently beyond our reach. As our knowledge expands, generally
so does our awareness of what we do not yet know. At the border of science,
developing new advances and tackling problems generates new problems and
puzzles. At least in some fields, the pace at which we push the research frontier

