1312

Anjan Chakravartty

the board—because there is no rational obligation to go one way or another. Lacking
rational obligations and recognizing the rationality of those with conflicting stances,
it would be indefensible, incoherent even, to adopt any such option.
There is, I think, a way of understanding this argument that seems compelling, but
this requires an illicit conflation—illicit in the sense that it begs the question against
stance voluntarism. The argument runs together the idea of choosing a rational
stance with that of choosing a stance that is rationally obligatory. But the very idea
that a given stance must be rationally obligatory to be rationally chosen is precisely
what stance voluntarism denies. Voluntarism, recall, rests on a permissive conception
of epistemic rationality, according to which in at least some cases different options
may be rational and thus permitted, thereby denying the uniqueness thesis, according
to which only one option is rational, which entails that it is rationally obligatory.
On the voluntarist view, rational choice and rational obligation are distinct concepts
and cannot be run together. To argue in a non-question-begging way that only stances
underpinning realism are rational (and thus obligatory), one would have to show that
alternative stances are, as it turns out, not rational after all, but this would require
something more than what has been provided: a compelling argument for an
alternative theory of rationality in light of which such a demonstration could be
given. This, however, is a tall order.
While Pincock does not establish an account of rationality that would yield the
desired result, he does furnish something important in its own right: an explication of
the rationality of a stance underlying a particular form of realism. While I cannot do
this justice here, the basic idea is that given certain attitudes and epistemic policies
regarding demands for and the evidential weight of explanations, a stance leading to
realism is “mandatory.” Note, however, the conditional nature of this prescription.
“Obligation” here follows from the prior adoption of an underlying stance concerning
evidence and explanation. Of course, given realist-friendly stances—at least some of
which are surely internally consistent and coherent and thus rational—one ought to
believe as realists do, but this has no implications for the rationality of stances
generally. It is sufficient here, I submit, to note that different agents may adopt
different but nonetheless rational stances, reflecting the sorts of things they value,
epistemically, including certain kinds of information, evidence, and explanation,
yielding different combinations of ontological commitment and agnosticism. We
should not be expecting further resolution than this in debates about scientific
ontology.
4. Reductio? Grappling with forces of science denialism
Even if the preceding casts doubt on the attempt to undermine stance voluntarism
directly by establishing that some particular stance underlying realism (or
antirealism) is rationally obligatory, indirect strategies remain. Perhaps most
striking among recent attempts to go the indirect route are arguments to the effect
that voluntarism in this sphere is self-undermining. My application of voluntarism
focuses on what are commonly viewed as philosophically (and scientifically, as the
history of science attests) “respectable” interpretations of the epistemic upshot of
scientific inquiry. However, say these critics, a permissive conception of rationality
opens the door to what are commonly viewed as disreputable practices of “inquiry”

