half-way. On Woodward’s way of thinking about causation I have, in effect, told
you that there is some other position of the knob P such that, if the knob had been
at P (instead of at the half-way mark), then the water would have been at a different
temperature. Obviously I could provide you with more of this kind of information.
I could be more specific about the way the temperature depends on the knob’s position. For example I could say that if the knob were turned all the way, the water
would be boiling. Woodward holds that this information is also causal-explanatory
information about the water’s temperature. In general, information about how the
event being explained is situated in a range of counterfactual alternatives is causalexplanatory information. Bare claims about the token causes of the event are one
way to provide this kind of information, but not the only way.
Let me now turn to Strevens’ theory. Strevens thinks that there are two kinds
of causation. On the one hand, there is the low-level, microphysical production of
precisely-specified events, like that event consisting in these atoms being in exactly
these positions at this time. On the other hand, there is high-level causation between
imprecisely-specified events, as when Suzy’s throw causes the window to break.
These events are imprecise because there are a huge number of microphysical ways
Suzy could have thrown, and a huge number of ways in which the window could
break.
Strevens analyzes high-level causation in terms of low-level causation; he
says relatively little about what low-level causation is. Here, in brief outline, is how
the analysis goes. He agrees with the common thought that the causes of an event
“make a difference” to whether that event occurred. But he does not understand
difference-making in counterfactual terms. Instead he starts with the notion of a set
of facts “causally entailing” another fact. Set S causally entails F if and only if, first,
S entails F, and second, this logical relation “mirrors” the low-level, microphysical
production of F (or of the “maximal precisification of F”) by the members of S.
Suppose we have such an S and F. Strevens then subjects the set S to a process of
“abstraction.” Roughly speaking, this process weakens the members of S as much
as possible, consistent with S still causally entailing F. So we might start with the
fact that I threw a rock with a mass of 50 grams at that window, the fact that it had
an initial velocity of 10 m/s, the fact that there was nothing around to interfere with
14

