Philosophy of Science

1307

In recent work I have endorsed this general contention and have attempted to
provide a more systematic explication of what these underlying commitments are,
how they function to produce different epistemic assessments of scientific inquiry,
and why, in at least some cases, disagreements between those who assess theories and
models differently are likely not amenable to resolution (see Chakravartty 2017a for a
detailed discussion). At the heart of this account are two ideas: the notion of epistemic
stances, which comprise the relevant, variable, underlying commitments; and a
defense of a permissive account of epistemic rationality, according to which under
certain fairly minimal conditions, different stances may be rational even if
conflicting. Among a number of aspects of this picture one might contest, the
account of rationality on which it depends is perhaps most controversial. In this
article I consider two recent, distinct but related concerns that focus attention here
specifically. The first, due to Christopher Pincock (2023), raises questions about
whether epistemic agents such as scientific realists are, in fact, rationally obligated to
hold the beliefs they do about the output of scientific work. The second, due to Stathis
Psillos (2021) and Ragnar van der Merwe (2022), raises questions about whether
failing to recognize such obligations courts science denialism, often in the form of
pseudoscience.
In the following section I briefly review the key features of my conception of
stances and rationality and the implications it has for debates about realism and
antirealism, which constitute the focus of these recent critiques. Next, in section 3,
I consider the idea that realists must view their own epistemic stances as rationally
obligatory on pain of incoherence, and argue that this concern is sustained by two
conflations: one of beliefs with underlying stances, and another of rational choice
with rational obligation. Once these distinctions are clarified, the objection, though
instructive, loses its force. Finally, in section 4, I consider the charge that to accept
that conflicting epistemic stances may be rational has the unwelcome consequence
that forms of science denialism are also rational. I argue that this consequence does
not follow from the account of stances and rationality proposed. Recognizing this,
however, is sadly no antidote to science denialism, which is often driven by stances
that are not (or not merely) epistemic as such, and which represents a pressing
concern for anyone who is serious about science whatever their stances or
conceptions of rationality may be.
2. Scientific ontology and underlying epistemic stances
Debates about scientific realism concern how we should interpret the results of
scientific investigation. What do our best theories and models tell us about the world?
Realists contend that they give us credible descriptions of a mind-independent
reality, extending across a full range of subject matters including objects, events,
processes, and properties that cannot be detected by the unaided senses, or that are
otherwise distant from us in time or space. Antirealists, in various ways, deny this
interpretation of our best science. Debates in this sphere have often been framed in
terms of the (approximate) truth of theories and the successful reference of
theoretical terms, as per foundational discussions in the 1970s and 1980s. Arguably,
however, the broadness of these formulations is out of step with more recent, finergrained emphasis on the details of scientific practice, and a growing diversity of more

