8
History of Science

Science of Science. Alexander Krauss, Oxford University Press. © Alexander Krauss (2024).
DOI: 10.1093/9780198937401.003.0009

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/58964 by guest on 16 November 2024

Science has a history, and when we study the history of science including the
discoveries, theories and the methods used to create them, we can trace their
origin to the individuals who developed them. Thomas Kuhn, the most cited
and well-known historian of science in the 20th century, offered an explanation of the history of science that rejected the view of scientific change
as being cumulative.(1,32) The history of science can be viewed as a cycle in
which established ideas and facts are doubted, new problems and evidence
then lead to new revolutionary ideas and facts (and replace the established
ones), which eventually over time are also doubted once problems and anomalies associated with them become apparent, and the cycle begins again. For
Kuhn, this process of science is not cumulative. It represents revolutionary
paradigm shifts, in which a scientific community rejects existing assumptions,
concepts and theories and adopts entirely new ones. Kuhn thus describes science as going through paradigm shifts. For him, ‘revolutionary’ scientists help
redefine which research questions and assumptions are important and what
methods are best. In short, they help rewrite the rules of the game. This notion
of science may seem to apply to shifts in physics in the past, namely shifts in
our theories of physical reality from Aristotle to Newton and then to Einstein.
Kuhn focused on such cases largely in physics up to the early 20th century.(1)
The shift from the Ptolemaic earth-centred theory of the universe to the
Copernican sun-centred theory characterised the classic paradigm change,
which Kuhn focused much research on. In geology for example the shift from
a stabilist to a plate-tectonic mobilist view of the earth can also, according
to Kuhn’s thesis, be viewed as a paradigm shift. In economics, it can reflect
the shift from a neoclassical view of individuals acting as perfectly rational
actors towards more behavioural approaches that view individuals as acting
irrationally at times. In physics, it can reflect the shift from a classical Euclidean
view of time and space as flat to an Einsteinian view reflecting the curvature
of time and space. And it can reflect the shift from a classical mechanics’ view
of physical reality in which particles act in a deterministic way (Newton) to
a quantum mechanics’ view of physical reality in which phenomena act as
both a wave and a particle at the same time and in a probabilistic way (Bohr,

