Scientific Research in Education

crucial because it suggested a major revision to the extant model of how
the molecule can replicate itself.
Genetic analysis by Francois Jacob and Jacques Monod, also in the
1950s, showed that in addition to providing the templates for constructing
important proteins, some genes code regulatory proteins that can turn
specific sets of genes on or off (see Alberts et al., 1997). Early work on
gene regulation had suggested that when the sugar lactose is present in the
nutrient medium of the common bacterium E. coli, the bacteria produce
a set of enzymatic proteins that are responsible for metabolizing that sugar.
If the lactose is removed from the medium, those enzymes disappear. The
first evidence that led to an understanding of gene regulation was the
discovery that there were mutant strains of E. coli in which those enzymes
never disappeared because the bacteria were unable to shut off specific sets
of genes. Previous work had shown that mutations—changes in one or
more nucleotides in the gene sequence—could alter the activity of
enzymatic proteins by changing the protein structure. Thus, it was first
hypothesized that in these mutant E. coli strains, mutations resulted in
some enzymes being changed to an “always-on” state. Again, this model
was later shown to be invalid when Jacob and Monod demonstrated
experimentally that these mutant bacteria were instead deficient in the
proteins that served as regulators that specifically repressed (or “turned
off ”) those sets of genes.
Because most regulatory proteins are present in cells in minute quantities, it required more than a decade for advances in cell fractionation and
purification to isolate these repressor proteins by chromatography. But
once isolated, the proteins were shown to bind to specific DNA sequences,
usually adjacent to the genes that they regulate. The order of nucleotide
bases in these DNA sequences could then be determined by a combination of classical genetics and molecular sequencing techniques.
This is just the beginning of the story. This work has led to new
knowledge in molecular biology that affects our understanding of both cell
development and of genetic disease. The work of countless molecular
biologists in the past 50 years has resulted in the recent publication of the
linear “map” of the entire human genome, from which, one day—perhaps
many years in the future—all genetically influenced diseases and all developmental steps may be deduced.

32

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN EDUCATION

Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

