473

Page 14 of 27

Synthese (2022) 200:473

Weisberg calls ‘generalised’ models (models of general phenomena, such as parasitism) and ‘hypothetical’ models (models of nonexistent targets, such as xDNA). In
Godfrey-Smith’s words, direct fiction views “have to massage the phenomena quite a
lot” (2009, p. 159). Toon’s (2012) response to these cases is to treat them as exceptions:
model descriptions prescribe imaginings of target systems unless the models have no
target, in which case they prescribe imaginings about fictional systems. However, this
latter option inherits the problem of transfictional statements for targetless models.
Levy’s (2015) response to the objection is to dismiss these cases as either only apparently targetless or as bits of mathematics. This poses an immediate question: under the
assumption that the target will eventually be clarified, what is the model about until
then? Consider the following counterfactual: ‘If neutralinos existed, they would only
interact with the intermediate vector bosons.’ We don’t know whether these hypothetical particles of supersymmetry models will eventually be found, but we nonetheless
treat models of these as entities in their own right. The main difficulty of the direct
fiction view is the fact that it makes modelling parasitic on what is already known
to exist. By making the definition of ‘model’ independent from modelers’ epistemic
states, the indirect fiction view comes out as a more inclusive alternative.20
The aforementioned inclusivity results from the workings of the indirect fiction
view: the indirect view cashes out modelling as a two-step process, where in the
first step one investigates the model, and in the second one investigates whether the
model bears on the world (and, if so, how this representational relation functions). This
explains why the two notions of fiction—fiction as falsity and fiction as imagination—
need not be mutually exclusive: fictions might still represent, beyond themselves, but
crucially, it is in virtue of their imaginative nature and not this representational power
that they are fictions. Translated to truth, this is the idea that when modelling one first
pretends the truth of the claims implied by the model, and only afterwards considers
whether these fictional truths map onto truths via one’s preferred theory of scientific
representation, such as Frigg’s and Nguyen’s DEKI account of scientific representation
(2016; 2020). Asking about the representational power of a model is then a question that
is bracketed when investigating a model. I believe the characterisation of modelling as a
two-step activity offers a good and unifying reconstruction of counterfactual reasoning
in science.21 When reasoning with counterpossibles, one often first asks whether a
consequent follows from the antecedent in question before examining how the content
of the imaginary exercise in question relates to the world. Given that there don’t seem
to be any relevant cognitive differences between regular counterfactual reasoning and
counterpossible reasoning (see Sect. 3.2), it is only natural to characterise regular
counterfactuals in the same way. This independence from knowledge of actual states of
affairs afforded by the indirect fiction view of models thus enables a uniform treatment
20 Another viable inclusive alternative is to reconceptualise the indirect view of models into the ‘new fiction
view of models’ (Salis, 2020), a view which in order to account for the relationship between the properties
attributed to imaginary objects by the model and real objects abandons the notion of a model system and
appeals in favour of the notion of a ‘mental file’. Mental files are cognitive structures used by anti-realists
about intentionality for the storage of information about an object, which may or may not exist.
21 As Levy (2015) argues, while positing and analysing a model, on the one hand, and assessing its relation
to the actual world, on the other, might not come apart in actual practice, they are logically distinct operations.
The indirect fiction view recognises the logical distinctness of these two operations.

123

