of causation in explanation. Can the unification account explain why explanation so often, perhaps always, seems to follow the direction of causation?
You might think not: the explanation of a flagpole’s height in terms of the
length of its shadow seems to cite just as unifying a pattern as the explanation of shadow length in terms of pole height—the very same pattern, in
fact.
Kitcher takes up the challenge, arguing that the unification account reproduces the asymmetries in explanation usually put down to something
causal (Kitcher 1981). On his view, a unifying pattern is an argument pattern. Since arguments have a direction, the pattern in which the pole height
explains the shadow length is distinguished from the pattern in which the
length explains the height. The unifying power of each must, therefore, be
assessed separately. To solve the problem, the correct comparison is not between the unifying power of these two argument patterns, but between the
unifying power of the pattern that wrongly explains pole height in terms of
shadow length, and that of the pattern we usually cite to explain the height
of a flagpole.
Kitcher calls this latter argument pattern an origin and development pattern, and claims that it is instantiated by, and so subsumes, every account we
give of the properties of a thing that describes its origin and development,
as when, for example, we tell the story of the construction and erection of
the flagpole. The pattern is enormously general, then, and so easily wins the
right to explain the height of the flagpole. Having argued, in effect, that unificationist explanation tends to proceed in the direction of causation, Kitcher
then makes the dramatic claim that it is the order of explanation that determines the order of causation: our causal beliefs depend on and reflect our
explanatory practice.
The second objection to explanatory unificationism is that it makes explanation an overly global matter. How one phenomenon is to be explained
depends, according to the unificationist, on what best unifies all the other

15

