From the Individual to the Social

121

There are intellectual problems, however, whose character is quite
different from the Linda, John, and Paul problem, and which are not
well served by group discussion.
When I was a child, there was a very popular television game show,
Let’s Make a Deal, hosted by Monty Hall. Contestants would be shown
three curtains, and they would be asked to choose one of them; they
would receive, as a prize, whatever was behind the chosen curtain.
One curtain had some valuable prize behind it: a fancy car, an elaborate vacation, various kitchen appliances, or some such thing. The
other two curtains had, as I remember, either nothing behind them,
or some booby prize. Once the contestant chose a curtain, Monty Hall,
who knew where the prize was located, would open one of the curtains
which was not chosen, showing that the prize was not there. The contestant was then given a choice: stick with the curtain you’ve chosen, or
switch to the other as yet unopened curtain. Contestants agonized over
this choice as members of the audience shouted encouragement to either switch or stay with the choice they first made. This was—​really!—​
a very popular television show years ago.
This setup led to the creation of a simple brain teaser, named after
the show’s host: The Monty Hall Problem. As it is typically stated, we
imagine the contestant facing the choice exactly as described above.
The two curtains which do not have the desirable prize behind them
are sometimes colorfully imagined to each hide a goat. The contestant
makes a choice—​perhaps Curtain Number One—​and Monty Hall
shows that one of the remaining curtains—​perhaps Curtain Number
Two—​has a goat behind it. The contestant is then allowed to stay with
Curtain Number One or to switch, instead, to Curtain Number Three.
What should the contestant do? Should that person stay with their initial choice or switch to the as yet unopened curtain? Or are these two
options equally likely to have the prize behind them, thus providing no
reason to favor one choice over the other?
Most people presented with this problem believe that there is no
reason at all to favor one of these options over the other. Their reasoning, at least typically, is roughly like this. There are three curtains,
and the prize is behind one of them. So the chance that the prize is
behind Curtain Number One is one-​third; the chance that the prize
is behind Curtain Number Two is one-​third; and the chance that the
prize is behind Curtain Number Three is also one-​third. So when the

