Synthese (2022) 200:473

Page 11 of 27

473

possible world which stands in some similarity relation to the actual world.15 Rather,
what makes a counterfactual true is a matter of whether a counterfactual’s consequent
(C) follows from its antecedent (A). This basic mechanism, which underlies the mental models account of conditionals (Sect. 3.2), can equally accommodate all types of
counterfactuals: regular counterfactuals, counternomics, and countermetaphysicals.
The task at hand is to make precise what ‘follow’ means here; I will do so in Sect.
4.2.1.
To sum up, a good account of counterfactuals and counterfactual cognition in
science ought to pay attention to the connection with modelling practice, which emphasises the key role of the imagination—understood propositionally—in counterfactual
evaluation. Furthermore, it ought to accommodate the empirical results which show
that counterfactuals are evaluated on the basis of whether their consequents follow from
their antecedents, an evaluation which is silent to the modal status of the states of affairs
described by their antecedents. Luckily, there is one such account available, which I call
‘the make-believe view of scientific counterfactuals.’ This is a fiction-based account
of counterfactuals, which closes the gap between traditional philosophical theories
of counterfactuals and scientific practice, and reclaims counterfactuals as a rightful
object of study for philosophers of science.

4 Fictionalism about scientific counterfactuals
4.1 Contextualising fiction
On the one hand, counterfactuals feature prominently in scientific models. On the
other, counterfactual reasoning is an imaginative activity. When put together, these
two observations suggest a view of models as “works of fiction” (Cartwright, 1983,
p. 153). The idea that the notion of fiction might be relevant to the practice of modelbuilding and scientific representation with models is not new. It was explored in a
series of essays edited by Suárez (2009), as well as by those who advocate any version
of what is nowadays known as the fiction view of models. In the following extend
this view of scientific models to counterfactuals in science, and thereby propose a
fiction view of counterfactual reasoning in science, the make-believe view of scientific
counterfactuals. While I am not the first to propose a fictionalist view of counterfactuals
(see e.g. Kim & Maslen, 2006; Kimpton-Nye, 2020; McLoone 2019; and Wilson,
2021), my account offers new insights with respect to the motivation, scope, and
implications of fictionalism about counterfactuals in science. First, I introduce both
the notion of fiction it uses (Sect. 4.1.1), as well as the fiction view of models it draws
on (Sect. 4.1.2). Then, I develop the make-believe view of scientific counterfactuals
and discuss in which respects it improves on the aforementioned literature (Sect. 4.2).

15 Recall that ‘actual’ is indexical; which world is considered as actual is designated by the context in
which a counterfactual is uttered.

123

