Scientific Representation

Roman Frigg and James Nguyen

Similarity 2: A scientific model M represents a target T iff M and T
are similar in relevant respects and to the relevant degrees.

between misrepresentation and non-representation (Suárez 2003: 233–
235).

On this definition one is free to choose one’s respects and degrees so that
unwanted similarities drop out of the picture. While this solves the last
problem, it leaves the problem of logical properties untouched: similarity
in relevant respects and to the relevant degrees is reflexive (and
symmetrical, depending on one’s notion of similarity). Moreover,
Similarity 2 faces three further problems.

Thirdly, there may simply be nothing to be similar to because some
representations represent no actual object. Some paintings represent elves
and dragons, and some models represent phlogiston and the ether. None of
these exist. This is a problem for the similarity view because models
without targets cannot represent what they seem to represent because in
order for two things to be similar to each other both have to exist. If there
is no ether, then an ether model cannot be similar to the ether.

Firstly, similarity, even restricted to relevant similarities, is too inclusive a
concept to account for representation. In many cases neither one of a pair
of similar objects represents the other. This point has been brought home
in now-classical thought experiment due to Putnam (1981: 1–3). An ant is
crawling on a patch of sand and leaves a trace that happens to resemble
Winston Churchill. Has the ant produced a picture, a representation, of
Churchill? Putnam’s answer is that it didn’t because the ant has never seen
Churchill, had no intention to produce an image of him, was not causally
connected to Churchill, and so on. Although someone else might see the
trace as a depiction of Churchill, the trace itself does not represent
Churchill. The fact that the trace is similar to Churchill does not suffice to
establish that the trace represents him. And what is true of the trace and
Churchill is true of every other pair of similar items: even relevant
similarity on its own does not establish representation.
Secondly, as noted in Section 1, allowing for the possibility of
misrepresentation is a key desiderata required of any account of scientific
representation. In the context of a similarity conception it would seem that
a misrepresentation is one that portrays its target as having properties that
are not similar in the relevant respects and to the relevant degree to the
true properties of the target. But then, on Similarity 2, M is not a
representation at all. The account thus has difficulty distinguishing

16

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

At least some of these problems can be resolved by taking the very act of
asserting a specific similarity between a model and a target as constitutive
of the scientific representation. Giere (1988: 81) suggests that models
come equipped with what he calls “theoretical hypotheses”, statements
asserting that model and target are similar in relevant respects and to
certain degrees. He emphasises that “scientists are intentional agents with
goals and purposes” (2004: 743) and proposes to build this insight
explicitly into an account of representation. This involves adopting an
agent-based notion of representation that focuses on “the activity of
representing” (2004). Analysing representation in these terms amounts to
analysing schemes like
Agents (1) intend; (2) to use model, M; (3) to represent a part of
the world W ; (4) for purposes, P. So agents specify which
similarities are intended and for what purpose. (2010: 274)
(see also Mäki 2009, 2011; although see Rusanen and Lappi 2012: 317 for
arguments to the contrary). This leads to the following definition:
Similarity 3: A scientific model M represents a target system T iff
there is an agent A who uses M to represent a target system T by

Spring 2020 Edition

17

