180

The Structure of Scientific Inference

preferential treatment, but there are severe objections to them in the form
developed by Jeffreys. First, the restriction to differential equations is inadequate even for physics in its present theoretical state, let alone for the
other sciences. Second, it has proved very difficult to define a simplicity
ordering which satisfies all our intuitions regarding simplicity. Moreover, it is
not clear what justification could be given for the assumption that greater
simplicity is correlated with higher initial probability of hypotheses. 1 Some
of these points will be investigated in chapter n , but meanwhile it must be
concluded that this example of method (b) at least has not yet been shown to
be adequate for a confirmation theory.
Method (c) involves abandoning the attempt to confirm generalizations in
infinite domains (let us call these strictly universal generalizations). Structure
descriptions would now be specified, not by a set of precise ^-numbers, which
would give zero probabilities, but by a set of intervals of ^-numbers, for
example 'A proportion p of Ps are Qs\ where 61 ^ p<02, and (6^ d2) is a
fixed finite interval in the range o to i . 2 This hypothesis may then have nonzero probability, since it is a member of a finite set of similarly defined
hypotheses, and the confirmation of any finite prediction may be made as
precise as we like by taking the intervals sufficiently small. Alternatively, the
method may be interpreted as in Carnap's instance confirmation, as a way of
assigning finite probability only to states of finite subsets of all the individuals,
since these states are equivalent to disjunctions of denumerable states involving the rest of the denumerably many individuals. Since there is a finite
number of states of a finite number of individuals, each can be given a finite
probability.
It has often been argued that, since science necessarily involves strictly
universal generalization, a confirmation theory must assign finite probabilities
to such generalization, and that therefore method (c) is unacceptable. That this
consideration is not relevant to the confirmation of finite predictions has
already been argued in connection with the transitivity paradox. But in
addition to this argument, I shall now try to show more positively that even
though strictly universal generalizations may have an essential role in science,
they do not need to be confirmable. It will turn out that the zero probability
of strictly universal generalizations is not after all counter-intuitive when
carefully scrutinized, and that whenever a generalization in an infinite
domain appears to be required by scientific inference, it can be replaced
1 Jeffreys explicitly adopts the view proposed here, that confirmation theory is the explication of scientists' intuitions. H i s justification for the simplicity postulate goes as follows:
' T h e actual behaviour of physicists in always choosing the simplest law that fits the observations therefore corresponds exactly to w h a t w o u l d be expected if they regarded the probability
of m a k i n g correct inferences as the chief determining factor in selecting a definite 1 law out of
an infinite number that w o u l d satisfy the observations equally well or better, and if they
considered the simplest law as having the greatest prior probability.' (Scientific Inference, 60.)
2

Proposed b y J. Darlington, ' O n the confirmation of laws', Phil. ScL, 26 (1959), 14.

