46

Philosophy and Logic
Table 19 Undecidability “Metatheorems”

Author Metatheorem about CH
Gödel
Cohen

Metatheorem about AC

Con ðZFCÞ  Con ðZFC þ CHÞ Con ðZFÞ  Con ðZF þ ACÞ
Con ðZFCÞ  Con ðZFC þ :CH Þ Con ðZFÞ  Con ðZF þ :ACÞ

absolute (“such-and-such is consistent”). Gödel’s method of proof, with the socalled inner model of constructible sets, establishes relative consistency not
only for CH but for a generalization GCH to be introduced in §8.3. Cohen’s
method of proof, that of so-called forcing, can be used to give a different proof
of relative consistency for CH as well as a proof of :CH: Both methods have
been found to have innumerable other applications and are absolutely central to
the ongoing work of set theorists today. While it would be infeasible to attempt
to expound these methods in any detail in a work such as this – they are not
covered even in the most thorough introductory-level texts – it will prove
possible to give some idea of their nature later.
Meanwhile let it be noted that either method can be used to prove the relative
consistency of :SH; as was done by Ronald Jensen using Gödel’s method and
by Thomas Jech and independently by Stanley Tennenbaum using Cohen’s
method. Further, Robert Solovay, among many other important early applications of Cohen’s method, used it in joint work with Tennenbaum to prove the
relative consistency of SH.
Although these methods originated to deal with problems at the level of the
theory of arbitrary sets of reals, they have also applications at other levels. In
particular, John W. Addison, using Gödel’s work, showed that regularity theorems cannot be extended to higher point classes than the classical workers
between the world wars had handled, while Azriel Levy, using Cohen’s method,
showed the same for structural theorems, thus explaining the impasse that had
been reached by the Polish and Russian schools.
All this means that, if regularity and/or structural theorems are to be obtained
for higher point classes, or if the status of SH and/or CH is ever to be settled,
new axioms beyond ZFC will be needed. Gödel and Cohen drew opposite
philosophical conclusions from this situation, Cohen doubting there was any
fact of the matter about whether CH is true, and Gödel (1947) advocating a
search for new axioms to prove or (as he thought more likely) disprove it. Thus
far, however, no hypothesis settling the size of c has acquired the status of an
accepted axiom, the way AC, after some resistance, eventually did. But a
vigorous research program continues, of which more later.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 201.141.17.62, on 25 Jan 2022 at 00:17:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108981828

