HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY

175

uniform continuity for the relevant function, without essential loss in mathematical content. Thus to ﬁnd scope for speciﬁcally intuitionistic reasoning,
one has to look for instances where the use of typically intuitionistic axioms
such as the continuity axiom or the fan theorem results in a signiﬁcantly better
or more elegant result, and such cases appear to be comparatively rare.
To some extent the above, mutatis mutandis, also applies to constructive
recursive mathematics. Thus, for example, the usefulness of the beautiful
Kreisel-Lacombe-Shoenﬁeld-Tsejtin theorem is limited by two factors: (1) an
appeal to the theorem can often be replaced by an assumption of continuity in
the statement of the result to be proved; (2) in many cases, continuity without
uniform continuity is not enough, as witnessed e.g. by Kushner’s example of
a continuous function on [0, 1] which is not integrable.
In the literature contributing to Brouwer’s and Markov’s programme, a
comparatively large place is taken by counterexamples and splitting of classical notions. This may be compared with periods in the development of
classical analysis and topology in which there was also considerable attention
given to ‘pathologies’. In this comparison, BCM exempliﬁes a later stage in
constructivism.
Finally, let us note that in classical mathematics there arise questions of
constructivity of a type which has not been considered in the constructivistic
tradition For example, one may attempt to ﬁnd a bound on the number of
solutions to a number-theoretic problem, without having a bound for the size
of the solutions.34
§9. Concluding remarks. In the foundational debate in the early part of
this century, constructivism played an important role. Nevertheless, at any
time only a handful of mathematicians have been actively contributing to
constructive mathematics (in the sense discussed here).
In the course of time, the focus of activity in constructive mathematics
has shifted from intuitionism to Markov’s constructivism, then to Bishop’s
constructivism. In addition there has been a steady ﬂow of contributions to
classical recursive mathematics, a subject which is still ﬂourishing.
Much more research has been devoted to intuitionistic logic and the metamathematics of constructive systems. In this area the work has recently somewhat ebbed, but its concepts and techniques play a signiﬁcant role elsewhere,
e.g. in theoretical computer science and artiﬁcial intelligence, and its potential
is by no means exhausted (example: the notion of ‘formulas-as-types’ and
Martin-Löf-style type theories).
New areas of application lead to reﬁnement and modiﬁcation of concepts
developed in another context. Thus a development such as Girard’s linear
34 See [Luckhardt 1989].

