x

Introduction

well as a commentary on the same by Curtis Franks. The perspective of many
of the papers is historical, reﬂecting this shift of emphasis in contemporary
foundations of mathematics.
The inspiration behind this volume is the work and interests of the logician
Stanley Tennenbaum, and through Tennenbaum the work of Kurt Gödel—
a fundamental ﬁgure for Tennenbaum. Both saw mathematical logic as a
unity, and both believed in philosophical analysis of a special kind: rationally
optimistic in nature—not on the grounds of any genuinely abstract principle
perhaps, but with a particular view of the nature of human understanding at its
core.
§2. Contents. In 1959 Tennenbaum published an abstract announcing a theorem that became a standard introductory result in every presentation of model
theory of nonstandard arithmetic structures: There are no computable presentations of nonstandard models Peano Arithmetic (PA). On one hand, the result
revealed severe limitations on possible constructions of nonstandard models;
on the other hand, it opened a whole area of study around the problem: Which
formal systems are subject to the Tennenbaum phenomenon? In other words,
can we fully characterize formal systems which do not admit computable nonstandard models? Four papers presented in this volume give an account of how
much we have learned about this problem in the last 50 years.
Richard Kaye looks at the history and discusses the origins Tennenbaum’s
theorem and earlier results of Kreisel, Mostowski, and Putnam, and shows a
connection of to the Gödel-Rosser Incompleteness theorem: There is no consistent extension of PA whose restriction to 1 sentences is computable. He
then presents his own results on the Tennenbaum phenomenon for weak fragments of arithmetic. In particular, he proves that if T is an extension of PA in
which the MRDP theorem is provable, then T has no computable nonstandard
models.
Tennenbaum’s proof shows that if (M, +, ×) is a nonstandard model of
PA, then in fact neither (M, +) nor (M, ×) admit computable presentations.
It follows that many other natural reducts of the structure M expanded by
adding sets deﬁnable using + and ×, do not admit computable presentations.
Schmerl’s 1998 proof that some rich (in the non-technical sense) reducts can
be effectively presented was therefore somewhat surprising. Schmerl’s contribution to this volume provides a detailed analysis of the Tennenbaum phenomenon for reducts. Schmerl deﬁnes the notion of a generalized reduct and
then considers the two cases: rich reducts and their reﬁnements for which Tennebaum Theorem holds. He then analyzes the much less studied case of thin
and n-thin reducts, for which the theorem fails.

