

Formulae

the propositions become apparent: the enunciation is a pair construction formula/predicate formula; the same sequence is repeated in the
pairs setting-out/deﬁnition of goal; construction/proof. Finally, the
conclusion reverts to the original sequence. A limited group of object
formulae is governed by those construction and predicate formulae:
the construction and predicate formulae operate on the small group of
object formulae, rearrange them and yield the necessary results.
The global relation between construction and predicate formulae –
the sequence of four repetitions of these sorts of formulae – is the key
for generality. I will discuss this in detail in chapter  below.
The more local relation between object formulae, governed by
construction and predicate formulae (and, elsewhere, argumentation
formulae) is one of the keys for necessity. I shall return to this in the
next chapter.


:     
.

Contexts of formulae

First, an obvious point: the use of a system of formulae (especially noncompositional formulae) implies a professionalised, inward-looking and
surprisingly homogeneous group. This enhances the results of chapter
, and I shall return to this issue in chapter  below.
I shall move straight to the main issue, that of orality and literacy –
returning to Homer. In the Homeric case, formulae are seen by most
of the scholars as signs of orality. As explained above, this can not
be imported directly into the mathematical case. But the problem
remains: what sort of language use is implied by the use of formulae?
The word ‘oral’ is sometimes used to mean ‘illiterate’: in this sense
certainly it is inapplicable to the mathematical case. But this use of
‘oral’ is misleading (as is now well known, e.g. following Finnegan
). This is because there is no sharp dichotomy, ‘oral’ and ‘written’.
The cognitive reality is much more complex. The presence of writing
may be inﬂuential to varying degrees, in varying ways. So consider,
for instance, the ﬂexibility of formulae. The text is repetitive – but not
verbatim repetitive. This is comparable to the result in chapter  above,
concerning the behaviour of many-lettered names. And we shall return to the same result in the next chapter, with the quotation of
earlier results. Whether the Greek looked up his text or not, at any
rate he did not operate under the expectation that one should look up

