The tool-box



that the Greek geometer simply knew his Euclid very well, as a set of
logical facts in need of no reference. There is nothing impossible about
this – modern readers develop a similar grasp of the Euclidean system
as they read Greek mathematics, and, as I have shown above, the
numbers involved are such as to allow this: certainly less than 
clusters would cover the entire geometrical tool-box.
I am offering here a hypothesis according to which there is an
essential difference between the way in which earlier results are used
inside a given proof, and outside it. I have argued in the preceding section
that the internal structure of proofs tends to be linear, i.e. results tend
to be used immediately upon formulation rather than being put aside
for later use. Inside proofs, results relate to each other like the steps of
a ladder. The relevant information consists of the recent results only,
which implies a constant re-editing on the mental ‘page’ of the relevant
information available directly to the working mathematician.
On the higher level, however, of systems of propositions, I claim
that the metaphor should be quite different. It should no longer be a
ladder; rather, it should be that of an open plane. At any given stage of
the discussion, the set of accessible prior results is all equally accessible,
and no changes are made in its content as one goes on.
It is true, of course, that ‘ladders’ occur in large-scale mathematics.
I will mention in n.  below Saito’s analysis of Conics .–, which
is a series of lemmata leading to more central results. In general, I am
not speaking here about the organisation of particular treatises, but
rather about the use of the Euclidean tool-box. And yet, it is useful to
see that even within particular treatises the ladder is often not the
correct metaphor. In Apollonius’ Conics , most propositions do not
rely upon immediately preceding propositions. The main organising
principle in the book is thematic, and – is one of several themes
developed in the book. Euclid’s Elements book  is a famous example
of a work which could easily be given a ladder structure, but which
was not given that shape by Euclid. Mueller was especially interested


There are  propositions in this book,  of which might have referred to immediately
preceding propositions. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,  actually do so
–  out of , i.e. rather less than a third.

The rest are: –: cones and circles on them; –: the basic conic tool-box; –: elementary ‘topological’ discussion of tangents and intersections (with the intrusion of –, a major
addition to the conic tool-box); and –, the construction of the sections.

Heron did this, to judge by the Codex Leidenensis (Besthorn and Heiberg () , , , ,
–); but it is signiﬁcant that Heron’s treatment of the material remained uncanonical, and
was probably never intended as more than a jeu d’esprit. Moreover, Heron’s point was not the
ladder structure, but simply the use or avoidance of lines in diagram, as noted in chapter ,
n. . There was no premium, in Greek mathematics, on ladder structure per se.

