OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 6/5/2016, SPi

QUINE ’ S MODEL OF KNOWLEDGE



Objection 2. The center-periphery methodology differs from the analyticsynthetic methodology with respect to what is arguably the most important principle
of Quine’s theory: the principle of universal revisability. The analytic-synthetic
methodology views analytic statements as immune to revision, synthetic (empirical)
statements as linked to a range of experiences whose occurrence would (under
appropriate conditions) compel their revision. In contrast, the center-periphery
methodology (like the NAS methodology) views no statement as immune to revision
and the revision of no statement as compelled by any (speciﬁc) experiences. Given
this major gap between the two methodologies, any similarity between them is of
minor signiﬁcance.
Response. The claim that the analytic-synthetic distinction is tied to the traditional
revision principle is simply incorrect.8 This claim is refuted if not by the classical
Kantian model, then by Carnap’s model. In Carnap’s model, analytic statements are
based on linguistic conventions, and conventions in general are all too easy to revise.9
Furthermore, in Carnap’s model even the revision of synthetic statements allows a
signiﬁcant degree of freedom. Given an inﬁrming experience (or a series of inﬁrming
experiences) of a particular synthetic statement, Carnap allows a wide array of
reactions. Thus, discussing a case in which a protocol sentence deduced from a
physical theory is disconﬁrmed by experiment, Carnap says:
There are no established rules for the kind of change which must be made. For instance, the
P[hysical]-rules can be altered in such a way that those particular primitive sentences are
no longer valid; or the protocol-sentence can be taken as being non-valid; or again the
L[ogical-linguistic]-rules which have been used in the deduction can also be changed
(Carnap 1934: 317).10

Elsewhere, Carnap describes a hypothetical situation in which an empirical discovery
might naturally lead to a conventional revision:11
Quine, no element is uniquely divisible in this way. (c) According to Carnap, the application and
satisfaction conditions of some elements are purely conventional while those of others purely factual
(experiential); according to Quine, the application and satisfaction conditions of all elements are both
partly factual and partly conventional.
8

Although Quine himself appears to endorse this claim (Quine 1951a: 43), it is wrong. (See also next fn.)
One might try to defend Quine’s claim that for Carnap analytic statements are closed to revision by
saying that Quine relates to one part of Carnap’s dualistic model, namely Science. Quine would concede
that linguistic conventions in Carnap’s model are open to revision from the external perspective of MetaScience, but his point is that they are not open to revision from the internal perspective of Science. (Since
linguistic conventions are part of the framework of Science, they cannot be revised from within Science.)
But to compare Quine’s and Carnap’s models we have to take into account their entire models, and in
Carnap’s case, his model includes both Science and Meta-Science.
10
The two sentences are transposed. In the original we have:
9

For instance, the P-rules can be altered in such a way that those particular primitive
sentences are no longer valid; or the protocol-sentence can be taken as being non-valid;
or again the L-rules which have been used in the deduction can also be changed. There are
no established rules for the kind of change which must be made.
11

For use of boldface within citations, see fn. 3 in Chapter 1.

