OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 10/5/2016, SPi



THE STRUCTURE OF TRUTH

IV. The diallelon
The diallelon is one of the oldest and most inﬂuential arguments against the
possibility of a standard of truth, usually directed against the correspondence theory
of truth. According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, “diallelon”, or “diallēlon”, is
a Greek word, “διαλλἡλη”, the neuter form of “diallēlos”. Other related terms are
“diallelus” and “dialexis”. “Diallelon” means “deﬁnition in a circle”; “diallelus” means
“reasoning in a circle”. The notion has also been used for deﬁnitions and reasoning
involving inﬁnite regress. Since our theory is holistic, it is immune to arguments
based on circularity or inﬁnite regress per se. But one of the diallelon arguments, the
so-called “comparison” argument, goes beyond circularity (inﬁnite regress) per se,
and is particularly important in connection with truth.
The comparison argument essentially says that our thoughts cannot be compared
to reality but only to other thoughts, and therefore, a satisﬁable standard of “measuring up to reality” for thoughts is impossible. We can measure one thought against
another, but not against reality, or, more generally, against anything other than a
thought. The comparison argument has been advanced, or at least taken seriously, by
many philosophers, past and present. According to McDermid (1998), these include
Spinoza, Berkeley, Hume, Kant, Hegel, Bradley, Brentano, Santayana, Heidegger,
James, Dewey, Neurath, Hempel, Blanshard, Goodman, Quine, Rorty, Putnam,
Kuhn, Davidson, and Habermas, among others. Some names in this list might be
questioned, but clearly the comparison argument has had a broad appeal.
A classical formulation of the comparison argument appears in the Jaesche version
of Kant’s logic lectures:
Truth, it is said, consists in the agreement of cognition with its object[:] . . . my cognition, to
count as true, is supposed to agree with its object. Now I can compare the object with my
cognition, however, only by cognizing it. Hence my cognition is supposed to conﬁrm itself,
which is far short of being sufﬁcient for truth. For since the object is outside me, the cognition
in me, all I can ever pass judgment on is whether my cognition of the object agrees with my
cognition of the object. The ancients called such a circle in explanation a diallelon (Kant 1770s–
1800: 557–8).25

This formulation emphasizes both the alleged circularity and the alleged impossibility of comparing thought and reality. More recent versions of the comparison
argument say:
(a)

It is impossible to compare things of different kinds.
[T]he notion of comparing our system of beliefs with unconceptualized reality to see if
they match makes no sense (Putnam 1981: 130).26

25

See also Kant (1770s–1800: 61 (Blomberg Logic) and 280 (Vienna Logic)).
This is the antecedent of a conditional, but it is an antecedent that sums up Putnam’s view of the
matter.
26

