There must be at least 5 students.
Initially, any student can make assignment 1.
If a student has made assignment 1 then he can make assignment 2.
If a student has made assignment 2 then he can make assignment 3.
If there would be only 1 student then this protocol would be very easy to implement in
Islander. It would just be a linear graph with 4 nodes and three edges, where each edge
corresponds to making an assignment.
With multiple students however, you run into the problem that students may make
their assignments at different speeds. For example, one student may quickly deliver
assignments 1 and 2, while another is still busy with assignment 1. This means that at
any moment each student can be in any of 4 states, and thus the protocol as a whole
can be in any of 4n different states if there are n students. With as little as 5 students
drawing the graph would already become practically impossible as it would require the
designer to draw 45 = 1024 states plus all their edges. The only realistic way to specify
this protocol would be to use the formal language rather than the graph-representation.
Another way to implement this protocol in Islander would be to implement it as a
protocol for only 1 student, and then let n of these protocols run in parallel. In this way
we again only need to draw a linear graph with 4 nodes and 3 edges. However, this is
only possible because in this example there is no interdependency between the students’
actions. If we make the example a bit more complicated, for example by adding a final
exam that only starts when all students have finished all assignments, this is no longer
possible.
Another problem with Islander is that one cannot use universal quantifiers. Even
in Islander’s formal language one cannot directly state something like “If all students
have finished their assignments...”. The only way to achieve this is to create a list of
names of students, make sure that the name of a student is added to this list when he
or she enters the institution, and make sure that the name of a student is removed from
this list whenever he or she finishes his or her assignment. Then, whenever you need
the precondition that all students must have finished their assignments, you can specify
that this list must be empty. In practice, this turns out to be a tedious job to do all this
in Islander, making it far from user-friendly.

8

Future Work

We consider that the language as it is, is still too limited to be of real practical use. We
here list the shortcoming that we consider most important and that we plan to fix in the
near future, as well as other improvements that we are considering.
Firstly, we will add the possibility to specify the recipient of a message. Currently
every message is sent to all other agents in the MAS, which makes it impossible to send
confidential information. This means we will allow to write sentences such as:
If the auctioneer has said ‘welcome’ to a buyer then that buyer can say ‘hello’ to
the auctioneer.
Secondly, we would like the protocol designer to be able to express that a certain event
must have taken place a certain number of times. For example:

