PHYSICAL LAWS AND PHILOSOPHICAL

REDUCTION

lowing sense: The metalanguage defines, in intelligible terms,22 a sense
of "interpretation of L" "true in an interpretation of L" for the language
game L. (These definitions cover both intelligible and unintelligible
sentences of L.) Two sentences are equivalent if they have the same
truth-value under all interpretations. As an example, let us consider again
Russell's Theory of Descriptions. The ideal language game which we
are considering contains formulas of the first-order functional calculus
with identity (intelligible) together with formulas containing '(t x)',
'(£!)', etc., in specified ways (unintelligible). Here the sense of interpretation is the standard one for the intelligible part, and the task of
finding a translation is trivial once the semantics of the prima facie unintelligible part is set up. Neither of these features holds in general for
translational reductions. Another example of a successful translational
reduction, for those who don't like Russell's Theory of Descriptions, is
the reduction of numerical quantifiers (There are at least n; there are
at most n; there are exactly n; where n is a positive integer) to first-order
logic with identity.
The type of translational reduction just discussed is a special case of
a semantical reduction. In a semantical reduction the metalanguage establishes, in intelligible terms, a semantics for each sentence of the
language game L. This sort of reduction has a special significance because of its connection with metaphysical questions. If we have an
intelligible semantics for a sentence, then it makes sense to say that
sentence is true or false. If we have an intelligible sense of denotation
for a class of terms, then it makes sense to say that such things exist.
If we have an intelligible sense of satisfaction for a property or relational
predicate, then it makes sense to say that the corresponding property or
relation is real.
It is of some importance to notice that a semantical reduction may be
possible where a translational one is not, since metaphysical discussions
22
This requirement may seem too strong for certain kinds of translational reduction. For instance the virtual theory of classes establishes translations of a certain
(small) portion of set theoretical discourse into set-free discourse. If set talk were
taken as prima facie unintelligible and first-order logic intelligible, this would appear
to be an acceptable reduction. But the metalanguage would appear to require set
theory (or something which might be considered just as bad) to accomplish its
task. Perhaps the best way to look at it is this: Separate the criteria of philosophical
intelligibility of the object level C0 and the meta-level Czm. Speak of a reduction
having been achieved from the standpoint m. Speak of a thorough reduction having
been achieved just when m — o.

505

