Brian Skyrms
Pure syntax, semantics, and pragmatics may now appear as rather motley
categories.9 Perhaps the traditional way is not the most illuminating way
of dividing up the metalanguage. For the time being, I will simply refer
to the metalanguage without worrying about how or whether to draw
the syntax-semantics-pragmatics distinction.
The idea of a language system has already been stretched far beyond
the customary notion of a formal language, to the point where I think
that it is reasonable to begin using the term "ideal language game." Is
there no end to this process?
When an ideal language game is intended as an explication of actual
language use, the regularities which are idealized into rules should be
those which can be taken as indicative of competence of language use.
The limits on the process of idealization are then the limits of logical
richness of actual language use. Of course what is indicative of competence in language use is rarely clear-cut. Too bad, but that's the way
language use is, by and large.10 For this reason, among others, empirical
linguistic regularities will typically underdetermine the corresponding
ideal language game, leading to a range of alternative explications.
sorts of responses to various sorts of experiences, where the responses are degrees of
belief in propositions" (1968, pp. 179-80).
This view has the attractive feature of enabling empiricist epistemology to avoid
the pretense of the myth of the given and the neoidealism of the coherence theory
of knowledge (in this case, the coherence theory of rational belief).
9
Actually, the formulation given is not precise enough to tell us where the boundaries are. Logical consequence is a relation between items of language, unlike the
denotation relation. Is it therefore a syntactical relation rather than a semantical
one? Or is the distinction an epistemological one; that in order to learn about
logical consequence we must first study the denotation relation? Is semantics restricted
to denotation and things definable in terms of it, or does it include all sorts of relations
between items of language and items in the world? What about an idealized explanatory
relation between explanatory accounts and events?
There are lots of alternative ways to answer such questions. One way is in terms
of various functions of language. For instance, if we are interested in the language
function of describing the world, we will need referential semantics which will include that part of traditional syntax which is exclusive of inference rules. If we are
also interested in inferential functions of language more comes in. How much more
depends on how broadly inference is conceived. Epistemological concerns cut across
all categories. If we are interested in illocutionary force, etc., we bring in a whole
new array of factors. The best way of sorting out all these factors will depend on
what question is being investigated.
10
As a situation where things are relatively clear-cut and which illustrates some
of the richness of the notion of an ideal language game, Professor N. Belnap has
suggested that we look at the legal procedures for a trial. For example, consider the
concept of inadmissible evidence. If certain kinds of evidence are admitted in a
criminal trial, an appellate court may declare a mistrial. In doing so, it is in effect
saying the criminal trial game has not been played. Rules of admissibility of evi-

500

