SELECTION AND CAUSATION

211

the moon on the tides (e.g., by altering its orbit). More interestingly,
it may well be that there is no physically possible process that will
meet the conditions for an intervention on the moon’s position with
respect to the tides. . . . It is nonetheless arguable we have a principled basis in Newtonian mechanics and gravitational theory themselves for answering questions about what would happen if such a
surgical intervention were to occur and that this is enough to vindicate
the causal claim (G). (Woodward 2008)
Woodward proposes, rightly in our view, that “a properly formulated
version of a manipulability theory will thus allow us to talk about causal
relationships in some contexts in which interventions are not physically
possible” (2008).
We believe that it is possible to envisage a ‘surgical intervention’ on
gravitation itself. Accordingly, we would like to say (paraphrasing Woodward) that we have a principled basis in Newtonian mechanics for answering questions about what would happen if we (or God) were to surgically intervene on the relationship between mass and gravitational
attraction. If we made it, for instance, an inverse-cube relation instead of
an inverse-square relation, or changed the gravitational constant, then we
would change the gravitational force exerted by the moon without changing the mass of the moon or of the ocean. Newtonian mechanics would
lead us to expect that in such a case, the motion of the tides would change.
This is why we say that according to Newtonian mechanics, gravitational
attraction is an intermediary between mass and motion—a tertium quid
as the force-body paradigm urges. Physically impossible intervention is
the proper analytic tool for supervenience cases, not loosening the ‘hold
everything else the same’ clause.
As implied by the earlier discussion, the theory of natural selection is
different from that of gravitation, for natural selection is mathematically
necessary. When there are heritable differences in traits leading to differential reproduction rates, the probability of the fitter types increasing in
frequency is greater than that of the less-fit types increasing. This is simply
a mathematical truth. Applying the manipulability test, we have to tolerate
hypothetical interventions that are physically impossible, but refuse to
tolerate hypothetical interventions that are mathematically impossible.
This is why the manipulability test cannot properly be applied to
(5*) Natural selection caused evolutionary change in population P.
There is no room for a manipulable intermediary between advantageous
heritable traits and the increase in frequency that results from their being
advantageous. Such an intermediary would not be distinct from the increase in frequency. The analogy with gravitational attraction is flawed.

https://doi.org/10.1086/648102 Published online by Cambridge University Press

