188

[61]

[62]

H. Grossmann

and easily applicable rules, the gulf between the specialization of the “experts” and
the universal “relatedness” could be bridged.
Not a trace of such a conception of algebra can be found in any of Descartes’ forerunners, from Oresme to Viète and Fermat. Conceived not as a technical instrument
of mathematics, but as a philosophical method specially designed to aid in achieving
the universal science, the Algebra is Descartes’ exclusive, original creation.139 Once
this difference is clearly realized, it must be inferred that for the understanding
of the character of the Cartesian algebra, the “internal,” “logical” reasons for its
formation, reasons deriving from the internal development of mathematics, are of
little use, and must be discarded, for the Cartesian Algebra as a philosophic method
is not connected with the previous development of mathematics and hence cannot
be understood on the basis of this development. Other explanatory factors must be
sought. But no attempt to find them has as yet been made.
Previously, however, we have referred to two characteristic aspects of this new
“conception universelle de la science”: first that it shows many clearly marked
features analogous to those noted in the functioning of machines, alien to the
older conception of science, which obviously arose under the impact of new influences; secondly, we have seen that a number of historians of mathematics, such as
P. Boutroux, M. Marie, H. G. Zeuthen and others have pointed out the mechanical character of the algebraic procedures. They stress that the operations of the
Cartesian algebra reveal an automatism in the application of fixed rules; that
because of the simplification and rapidity of the procedure, they do not require
a great effort of intelligence; that they are thus accessible to everyone; that they
make mathematical mass production possible – the attacking of great problems
beyond the capacity of individuals, problems of which the solution is possible only
through the cooperation of many minds. In brief, the above mentioned historians
state that the Cartesian algebra objectively shows all the features characteristic
of the functioning of machines. It is itself an intellectual machine, an intellectual mill, on which one has only to “turn the handle in order to see the solutions
of problems come out of it.” Is this resemblance to machines in the functioning
of the Cartesian algebra only a coincidence, a mere accident? We prefer another
explanation.
In our view, it is perfectly natural that in an epoch when machines were winning
their first great victories in England, France, Holland, Italy and Germany, and visibly
demonstrating to everyone the advantages of the automatism of machine labor over
handicraft labor, the enthusiastic admiration for the former, which is expressed in all
contemporary accounts, should also influence the thinking of the leading minds – a
Bacon and a Descartes. Modern times were heralded by L. B. Alberti’s passionate
paean to technique.140 There we read that technique permits us “to cut rocks, pierce
mountains, fill valleys, resist the overflow of the seas and rivers, clean out swamps
139 Descartes could rightly say: “Je commence en cela par où Viète avait fini” (Letter to Mersenne,

March 31, 1638, AT II, 82).

140 Alberti’s book “On Architecture” was written about 1450 and published only posthumously in

Florence in 1485. Here it is quoted from the French edition (Paris, 1553, Preface).

