56

[171]

B. Hessen

Step by step, science flourished along with the bourgeoisie. In order to develop
its industry, the bourgeoisie required a science that would investigate the properties
of material bodies and the manifestations of the forces of nature.
Hitherto science had been the humble servant of the church and had not been
allowed to go beyond the limits set by the church.
The bourgeoisie had need of science, and science rebelled against the church
together with the bourgeoisie (Engels).26
Thus the bourgeoisie came into conflict with the feudal church.
In addition to the professional schools (schools for mining engineers and for
training artillery officers), the scientific societies outside the universities were the
centers of the new science, the new natural sciences.
In the 1650s the famous Florentine Accademia del Cimento was founded, with
the aim of studying nature by means of experiment. It included among its members
scientists such as Borelli and Viviani.
The Academy was the intellectual heir of Galileo and Torricelli and continued
their work. Its motto was Provare e riprovare (verify and verify again through
experiment).27
In 1645 a circle of natural scientists was formed in London; they gathered weekly
to discuss scientific problems and new discoveries.
It was from this gathering that the Royal Society developed in 1661. The Royal
Society brought together the leading and most eminent scientists in England, and in
opposition to the university scholasticism adopted as its motto: “Nullius in verba”
(verify nothing on the basis of words).28
Robert Boyle, Brouncker, Brewster,29 Wren, Halley, and Robert Hooke played
an active part in the society.
One of its most outstanding members was Newton.
We see that the rising bourgeoisie brought natural science into its service, into
the service of the developing productive forces.
Being at that time the most progressive class, it demanded the most progressive
science. The English Revolution gave a mighty stimulus to the development of the
productive forces. It became necessary not merely to resolve empirically particular
problems, but to establish a synthetic summary and solid theoretical basis for solving, by general methods, all the physical problems raised by the development of the
new technology.
And since (as we have already demonstrated) the basic problems were mechanical ones,‡ this encyclopedic survey of the physical problems amounted to creating a
consistent structure of theoretical mechanics which would supply general methods
for solving the problems of celestial and terrestrial mechanics.
It fell to Newton to carry out this work. The very title of his most important work—Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1687)—indicates that
Newton set himself precisely this work of synthesis.
‡ Optics also began to develop during this period, but the main research in optics was subordinated

to the interests of maritime navigation and to astronomy. It is important to note that Newton came
to study the spectrum by way of the phenomenon of the chromatic aberration in the telescope.
[Hessen’s note]

