2.

Support allies

Finding groups doing similar work to yours, and lifting up their work, doesn’t only further the
cause but builds a network of support on the site. You have a few options to consider:

3.

●

“Retweet,” or repost and share without comment: This is the easiest and
fastest way to share others' work. Even if you have a similar audience, it is likely
to help further the reach since it will be lifted to the top of people's feeds. For
sites driven by algorithmic curation, this also signals to the site to share the
post with even more people. This is also a great way to show appreciation for
positive comments on your work.

●

“Quote tweet,” or share with comment: If an ally’s message needs some
additional context, or you want to qualify why you’re sharing it, sharing with a
comment will make sure you are showing support while sticking with the
standards you set for yourself. It is also a great way to signal to your followers
that they too should consider sharing and supporting the work being lifted.

●

New message: Sometimes you’ll want to promote an ally who does not have a
post suitable for sharing on your feed. In those cases writing a new post
tagging them directly (see above) or using a relevant hashtag can help. If you
can, also link to their website or a relevant article so your audience knows
where to find more.

Use threads to keep messages relevant
By replying to yourself and threading messages together, you can say a lot more and
keep older posts relevant for longer. This can look like a timeline of events when they
happen, a collection of similar stories, or one longer message which has multiple shots
at gaining traction.

4.

Take on an easily recognizable username
It can be issue-specific, or it can be named after your organization. Shorter and
simpler is often better because, given character limits, it makes it easier for people to
quote or mention you. Finally, see how the name sounds out loud so that it can easily
be shared verbally.

5.

Be timely
Respond to news around your work as it happens, and when possible be the first ones
to break stories.

6.

Prioritize visuals
Social media has shifted to prioritizing videos and graphics over plain text. Taking the
extra time to find an appropriate photo or video record your message can help cut
through the noise and reach a broader audience. Many sites will also provide a
preview-image when sharing a URL, which has the added benefit of sharing more
information on your work.

ELECTRONIC FRONTIER ALLIANCE | ALLIES.EFF.ORG

