The Effects of Social Context on the Process of Scientific Investigation

159

We couldn’t understand why the experiments clashed. Clearly, the reasonable thing was
that one of them was wrong.

For many excellent reasons, it was concluded that it was Holt’s experiment
which was wrong. But this decision took place within a context of shared
theories and mechanisms and, equally importantly, within a context of
almost total disbelief in LHV. Anyone who wished to defend the validity of
Holt’s result, particularly after the results of the later experiments became
known, would almost certainly have had to reject some section of contem¬
porary physics. The fact that this did not happen does not necessarily imply
that it could not have happened.
For example, Clauser published a paper in 1976 (30a) in which he describes
an experimental investigation of Holt’s ‘anomaly’. In this paper, he points
out several ‘possibly significant’ differences between Holt’s apparatus and
Clauser’s own partial replication. One of these is that different sorts of
polarisation analysers were used: Holt employed calcite crystals, while Clauser
(and all the other experimenters) employed sets of glass plates, arranged in
parallel rows and aligned at the ‘Brewster angle’. Now morphologically, a
lump of crystal and a set of 13 or so glass plates are quite dissimilar, but
functionally they are held to be identical (or at least sufficiently alike to
avoid the necessity of including calcite crystals in the replication). This
functional identity is derived from our current theories about the nature of
polarised light; in other words, the identity is defined by the context.
(The practical equivalence of these devices was defined by the social
context in a much more direct way. Clauser’s lab operated on a tight budget.
He already had a set of glass plates from his earlier experiment, and would
not have been able to purchase a pair of calcites even if he wanted to, which
apparently he did not.)
I do not wish to claim that LHVs only manifest themselves in the presence
of calcite crystals, any more than I wish to claim that LHVs only show up in
the presence of experimenters whose surnames begin with ‘H’. Nevertheless
such claims are clearly not impossible to make. Their reasonableness, or lack
of it, derives from a set of tacit conventions. The risks involved in rejecting
these conventions vastly outweighed the possible benefits — in this particular
case. All I wish to point out is that functional equivalence is dependent on
theory. The fact that, for example, mercury thermometers appear to do the

