16

M. Zicchetti

30
For instance, (Pedersen 2021), (Horsten 2021) and (Zicchetti 2022). To argue that we have
such independent justification for consistency statements exceeds the scope of our investigation.
31
See (Feferman 1962, 1964, 1991). For a recent discussion of implicit commitments in this
context, see (Dean 2014), (Horsten and Leigh 2017), (Nicolai and Piazza 2018), or (Łełyk and
Nicolai 2022).
32
I am grateful to an anonymous referee of this journal for suggesting this scenario.
33
The idea that our acceptance of some concepts of truth might not need any justification, or
might be justified by default, has been investigated, for instance, in (McGee 2005) and (Fischer
et al. 2019).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/advance-article/doi/10.1093/pq/pqae059/7695466 by guest on 20 November 2024

type of justification for such statements: Some mathematicians (such as Gödel)
argued that we have some intuition-like faculty that might provide immediate
justification for statements, such as the consistency of S. Others argued that
we have some default type of justification for accepting consistency.30 Finally,
other philosophers (most notably Feferman) argued that reflection principles
such as consistency statements (and even stronger reflection principles) are,
in some sense, implicit commitments.31 This is important, as it places this investigation into a broader context within the philosophy and epistemology of
mathematics.
Moreover, it should be added that even if it were impossible to acquire an
inferential justification for consistency employing soundness arguments relative
to justifications provided by proofs, one might acquire such a justification by different means. One example could be, for instance, the following scenario:32 One
might argue that the truth-theoretic axioms of CT have a “special” epistemic
status. For instance, they might be justified (i) by default or (ii) by our understanding
of the concept of truth.33 With this, one might try to argue that our justification to believe the consistency of PA results from our justification to believe
the syntactic theory S—which does not contain PA—and our justification
we have for the concept of truth axiomatized by CT. Whatever justification
we have for S and CT does not seem to support the consistency of PA directly, i.e., without employing the soundness argument. Let me comment briefly on
this possibility. Suppose that such an argument would be transmissive. Then,
I believe this argument would ensure that our justification for believing in
the consistency of PA would be quite minimal. For instance, our justification
could result from some justification to accept a very small amount of induction, together with some justification to accept the concept of truth embodied
by CT. However, I suspect that the soundness argument will end up being
non-transmissive, as long as either (a) conditions such as (NUC) are in place or
(b) the justification to believe the premises of [SOUND] is provided by proofs
of formalized statements in the theory of truth. In the concrete scenario, (NUC)
would give us that proofs provided in CT[S] justify the soundness of PA only
if CT[S] is consistent. Therefore, my proposed argument for failure should
apply. A possibility to argue that [SOUND] is transmissive would be to either
reject (a) or (b). Concerning (a), one could, for example, deny or weaken the
(NUC). With this, there is no prima facie immediate way to argue for failure.

