Speech Acts

59

letters in English, German and Chinese. There are endless opportunities for
speciﬁc language pairs or groups of languages to be compared in terms of
speciﬁc speech act realisations, but needless to say that such comparisons
always require a careful consideration of the tertium comparationis, that is,
the common denominator that makes the entities under investigation comparable across different languages (see Taavitsainen and Włodarczyk 2021: 170 for
details).
An additional direction of research combines series of historical accounts of
a particular speech act into long-term trajectories of speech act developments. In
Section 6, I provided an outline of the history of apologies that started out in the
Anglo-Saxon period as penitential acts and confessions to God and underwent
a process of attenuation to become what they are today (Jucker 2019). Such
trajectories obviously depend on detailed knowledge about the individual stages
across the centuries and so far, not many speech acts have been investigated in
sufﬁcient historical detail to allow for convincing descriptions of their longterm trajectories. With the availability of additional trajectories, it will be
possible to compare them and ﬁnd generalisations across different trajectories
of the same language or even generalisation of trajectories across different
languages. In the area of semantic change, we already have a reasonable number
of case studies that allow the identiﬁcation of regularities of how the meaning of
words tends to change diachronically (see, in particular, Traugott and Dasher
2005). In the area of historical speech act research, we are still a long way off
from a similar level of understanding of the relevant developments. This offers
endless research opportunities for future generations of researchers.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 189.203.192.143, on 11 Nov 2024 at 14:00:57, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009421461

