4

Pragmatics

congratulating are relevant examples. The ﬁnal type of speech acts consists of
declarations. They tend to rely on institutional contexts for their successful
performance and effect an immediate change in the state of affairs, as for
instance in a declaration of war, the christening of a ship or the appointment of
a new committee member.
The groundwork provided by the language philosophers Austin and Searle
was soon adopted into the new and emerging ﬁeld of pragmatics and, in fact,
one of the early textbooks in pragmatics, Levinson (1983: chapter 5), still
provides one of the best introductions into this early version of speech act
theory. For a more recent overview, the reader is advised to consult Culpeper
and Haugh (2014: chapter 6) or Assimakopoulos (in press). Many of the
concepts developed by Austin and Searle continue to be used as analytical
tools up to today in spite of the numerous changes in research interests,
methodologies and theoretical underpinnings.
Much of the subsequent work on speech acts inherited the original
emphasis on the illocutionary aspect, that is, on the speaker and what he
or she tries to do by uttering a string of words. This is usually called the
illocutionary force of an utterance, but I prefer to follow a distinction
proposed by Holmes (1984; see also Searle 1976) between the illocutionary point and the illocutionary force of an utterance. The illocutionary
point refers to the function or purpose of a speech act, that is, whether it is
an apology, a threat or a warning, while the illocutionary force refers to the
strength with which the illocutionary point is presented, that is, whether it
is a heartfelt and sincere or a casual and perfunctory apology, for instance.
I shall come back to this distinction in Section 4.

1.3 The Four Waves of Speech Act Studies
The 1980s saw a growing interest in the newly emerging ﬁeld of pragmatics
with several important textbooks (in addition to Levinson 1983 mentioned in
the previous section, for example, Leech 1983 or Green 1989) and the founding
of the International Pragmatics Association. This was a time when linguistics
was still dominated by formalist approaches that focused on linguistic structures
and analytical tools that relied on native speaker intuition and invented sentences that were used as the basis for theorising. Against this background,
pragmaticists began to ask questions about actual language usage. Speech acts
were no longer seen as abstract entities that could be dissected with philosophical rigour into a set of constitutive felicity conditions. Instead, they came to be
seen as performance phenomena whose realisation could be investigated across
different groups of speakers. In the context of a move away from philosophical

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 189.203.192.143, on 11 Nov 2024 at 14:00:57, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009421461

