580

Roy T. Cook

ways to consume a fiction.26 This is important, since the vast majority of the comics that make up
the main continuity Marvel Comics oeuvre were not written or drawn by Byrne (or by Stan Lee and
Jack Kirby). It seems unlikely that many of these creators had Byrne’s metafictional strategy in
mind, or intended their comics to be read as fictional journalism in the manner sketched above
when creating their installments of the massive Marvel Comics tale. In short, when reading Marvel
Comics, we must choose which principles of generation for primary content we wish to mobilize,
from amongst at least two types (the Standard Interpretation, and the Fictional Journalism
Interpretation), with vastly different consequences for what counts as primary (and of course, as
secondary) content in the fiction. While we have already seen some of these in the discussion above,
in the next section we’ll explore some rather more specific differences between what is primarily
fictionally true on the Standard Interpretation and what is primarily fictionally true on the Fictional
Journalism Interpretation.

5. Consequences
As argued in the previous section, on the Fictional Journalism Interpretation of Marvel Comics
(as opposed to the Standard Interpretation), we are given very little direct information about what
actually happens in the fictional world of Marvel Comics. All that we are given directly—that is, the
only primary content we are provided—is information about the appearance of non-fictional
journalistic publications produced by the fictional Marvel Comics company within the story.
We should not be fooled by this, however, into thinking that the difference between these two
ways of interpreting the Marvel Comics narrative amounts to the Fictional Journalism Interpretation merely giving us less information. In addition, the two interpretations differ immensely in
terms of the secondary content—both imported and entailed—that fleshes out the story. We will
look at four specific examples.
First, consider the issue raised in the title of this essay: Spider-man’s real name. On the Standard
Interpretation, we know that Spider-man’s real name is “Peter Parker”—after all, it’s right there on
the cover of one-hundred-thirty-three issues of Peter Parker: The Spectacular Spider-man.
On the Fictional Journalism Interpretation, however, this cannot be right. After all, for most of
the sixty-plus years of Marvel Comics, Spider-man’s civilian identity was a highly prized secret—
one that he protected vigorously from villains who would use that information to harm him or his
loved ones. Thus, his actual name could not be the name that, within the fiction, is featured on the
cover of a work of journalism describing his superheroic exploits, and which appeared on the
newsstand monthly. The solution here is simple: Spider-man’s name is not “Peter Parker” at all.
Within the fiction his name is something completely different, but, just as happens relatively
frequently within real-world journalism, his name (and home address, and the names of his loved
ones, etc.) has been changed to protect the innocent.27
Second, the Fictional Journalism Interpretation forces us to understand narration boxes (at least,
third-person narration) somewhat differently than we do on the Standard Interpretation. On the
Standard Interpretation, we understand such narration, typically contained in small boxes near the
edges of panels, along lines similar to how we understand narration in other media, such as prose
literature: a narrator (who is not necessarily the author) is describing what happened, how these
events looked, and so forth to us. On the Fictional Journalism Interpretation, however, we must read
narration as the (fictional) journalist’s commentary on the events depicted in the comic, providing
26

See Brooker (2001) for a good overview of alternative and resistant interpretations of comics, and in particular for insightful
analysis of the importance of such resistant readings (especially of Batman comics) to queer comics consumers.
27
It is worth noting that this interpretation also allows us to make sense of the strange fact that many superheroes have
bizarrely alliterative names, or names which oddly allude to their costumed personas, or both, such as Peter Parker, Bruce
Banner, Otto Octavious, Steven Strange, Victor Von Doom, etc.

