Susan Stebbing

What Stebbing means by a constructed system here is a system that is
postulated as a replacement for a conceptual system used in our everyday
life—in the way that set theory might be seen as postulating a replacement
for our ordinary system of arithmetic. On this view, our everyday concepts
and propositions are vague and need to be replaced—or “explicated”, to
use Carnap’s later term—by precisely defined concepts, clearly stated
axioms and logically derived propositions. Stebbing’s fundamental
objection to this conception of postulational or explicatory analysis is that
it misunderstands the role of analysis, which is “to understand something
more clearly” (1933a: 81). Simply replacing our ordinary vague concepts
by precise ones does not genuinely show what it was we understood.
Consider, for example, the “replacement” of our ordinary concepts of
colour by concepts scientifically defined in terms of the wavelengths of
light, etc. Arguably, this can never do justice to what it is we experience
when we see colours and describe them in the ordinary ways we do: it
does not capture the phenomenology of our experience. In the same way,
we might question whether defining numbers as sets genuinely shows
what we “really mean” by number terms.
According to Stebbing, the logical positivists—and she specifically
mentions Schlick in this regard—put “the pursuit of meaning” before the
determination of the truth-value of propositions (1933a: 83). But this gets
things precisely the wrong way around, on Stebbing’s view: we begin with
propositions that we understand (in some sense) and can know to be true,
and in seeking an analysis of these propositions, we aim to clarify that
understanding by identifying the facts that make them true or false. This is
precisely the conception of analysis that she had attempted to articulate
and defend in her 1932 paper. On the explicatory conception (as Stebbing
seems to construe it), on the other hand, we postulate something with a
meaning that is intended to be clear once and for all, with the aim of
thereby guiding or constraining our subsequent determinations of the
truth-value of the relevant propositions.

12

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

