Inductive Logic as Explication: The Evolution of Carnap’s Notion of Logical Probability



431

After all, the concept of probability is explicated within inductive logic in order to
provide a rational reconstruction of the everyday practice of inductive reasoning
(1945a, 95). In Foundations (§49–51), moreover, the specific use of inductive probability in determining rational choice through expected utility maximization is a prominent feature of the narrative.
At the same time, the strong semantic focus of the explicandum does remain in
place in the later inductive logic, even if the reader might be distracted from it by the
talk of utilities and rational beliefs. The rationality of belief that Carnap is after goes
beyond thinking of rational degrees of belief as coherent belief states of some agent.
He is looking for belief states that are influenced only by the meaning of sentences
involved; wants to strip a belief state of any reference to nonsemantic, factual knowledge—hence the creation of the concept of credibility and the insistence on the semantic character of the target concept of the explication.
Overall, the general goal and the structure of the inductive logic project do not
change significantly. While the formalism did undergo some changes,3 Carnap’s interpretation of the status and the role of the explicatum level of the picture did not
change at all. What did change is some of the characterizations of the explicandum;
this change allowed for a more principled way of constructing the explicatum, due to
a close connection between intuitions about rationality of decisions and the axioms
for c-functions. It is clear that the revisions from the early to the late inductive logic
were not significant enough to make the late one unrecognizable from the viewpoint
of the early one. What remains to be answered is whether the changes were significant enough to warrant the interpretation that Carnap had moved from a logical to a
subjective notion of probability.
6. LO GICAL OR S UBJECTIVE?
Assessing the degree to which Carnap moved away from a logical and toward a subjective interpretation of probability requires knowing what we mean by these two
terms. Somewhat unsurprisingly, there appears to be no consensus on the exact features of the different interpretations, especially when it comes to the logical one.
Therefore, my method in what follows will consist in focusing on some of the features of the two interpretations and assessing Carnap’s development of his inductive
logics against that background—building on the understanding of the project developed over the previous sections. I will focus especially on the interpretations that
other writers have proposed of the development of Carnapian inductive logic or offered as arguments for the claim that Carnap’s underlying notion of probability had
changed.
In practically every philosophical introduction to probability, (the early) Carnap
is listed as the champion of the logical interpretation, considered as one of the three
dominant approaches to probability: the logical, the Bayesian or subjective, and the
empirical. This is not surprising, since Carnap himself, as mentioned repeatedly
above, takes the target concept of his explication to be exactly that: the logical

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/monist/article-abstract/101/4/417/5122836 by University of Birmingham user on 19 November 2019

application to the concrete knowledge situation at the time of the decision.
(Carnap 1947, 147)

