https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108914765 Published online by Cambridge University Press

58

Philosophy of Physics

states they are adjacent to. However, this is not just a feature of deliberation – it
is a feature of correlations more generally across space-time.
It may be beyond the remit of agency accounts to explain worldly probabilistic structure – it may be a given from which the temporal asymmetry of
causation is derived. However, some attempt might be made to explain the
temporal asymmetry of deliberation: the fact that we deliberate before we
decide. One simple explanation begins by characterising deliberation as an
information-gathering process – agents gather information from earlier states
of the world and themselves and store this in the form of deliberative states.
A general feature of recording systems in our world is that they gather information from the past and retain it towards the future, rather than the reverse
(Reichenbach, 1956; Albert, 2000: Ch. 6; Fernandes, 2022b). However, while
this might explain why deliberation is temporally asymmetric, it doesn’t
explain why deliberation comes prior to decision – why decision temporally
concludes deliberation.
Expanding on this ﬁrst attempt, one might require decisions to be appropriately sensitive to information gathered during deliberation. As a fact about our
world, it seems that decisions are insensitive to information gathered after the
decision – what you learn tomorrow is not appropriately correlated with the
decisions you made yesterday. Therefore, information gathered after your
decision is not part of deliberation: it doesn’t play the right functional role.
This asymmetry appears to also be an instance of a more general temporal
asymmetry of recording devices – the inputs that are relevant for outputs must
be prior in time to their outputs. The temporal asymmetry of recording devices
might itself be explained in broadly entropic terms (see, for example,
Reichenbach, 1956; Albert, 2000; Fernandes, 2022b).41
Given very general features of deliberation and the probabilistic structure of
the world, there is only one way that deliberation could have been temporally
oriented. Therefore, it will be hard to make sense of counterfactuals where one
reverses the direction of deliberation but keeps probabilistic structure intact –
the kind of counterfactuals that Price appeals to (Section 4.4). These agentbased explanations have more in common with statistical mechanical accounts
than Price’s account regarding how closely they relate the temporal asymmetry
of causation to physical temporal asymmetries. Using an ‘objective’ agency
explanation, the temporal asymmetry of causation is ultimately due to whatever
physical temporal asymmetries explain the temporal asymmetry of recording
devices combined with general temporally symmetric features of agency and
41

For an alternative account of why deliberation is temporally asymmetric, see Fernandes (2017).
Ismael (2016: 260−1) and Price (2007: 275−8) also suggest that epistemic constraints will be
relevant to explaining temporal features of deliberation, without specifying how.

