16

Philosophy of Physics

to the laws of fundamental physics either directly (if causation relates global
states) or indirectly (if causation relates parts of global states, given background
conditions). While these moves require some of our assumptions about causation to be given up, these costs may be affordable if they allow us to ﬁnd a place
for causation in a physical view of the world – and reject Russell’s eliminativist
conclusion. However, Russell has a third argument – an argument that identiﬁes
a crucial feature of causation that is not shared by the laws of fundamental
physics: temporal asymmetry. While Russell doesn’t give much weight to this
argument, it is perhaps Russell’s greatest challenge.13

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108914765 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2.3 Russell’s Third Argument
Russell’s third argument is that the temporal asymmetry of causation is in tension
with the character of the laws of fundamental physics. In the laws of fundamental
physics, ‘the future “determines” the past in exactly the same sense in which the
past “determines” the future’ (Russell, 1912−13: 15). Because Russell has in
mind deterministic laws, let’s begin our discussion there. Examples of deterministic laws include the laws of Newtonian mechanics, general relativity, and the
evolution of the quantum mechanical wave function described by the Schrödinger
equation.14 If the laws of fundamental physics are all deterministic, the state of
a system at one time is enough to logically determine its state at any other time,
given the laws. In this sense, laws are not temporally asymmetric in the way they
determine events. If we take this logical determinacy as a guide to the way that the
laws necessitate, any necessity in the laws operates equally well in both temporal
directions. Therefore, it seems that causal relations can’t inherit their temporal
asymmetry from an asymmetry in how the laws determine or necessitate events.
If one were looking to identify causal relations with laws or law-like regularities
of fundamental physics, there seems to be a problem – causal relations have
features that can’t be recovered from the laws of physics.
Does Russell’s argument apply if the laws are indeterministic? Arguably, it
does if the laws take the same ‘indeterministic character’ in both temporal
directions (Field, 2003: 437), such as by having similar well-deﬁned stochastic
probabilities in both temporal directions. Overall, if the laws are ‘determinism
symmetric’ and determine events in similar ways towards the past and the
future, it seems that causal relations cannot inherit their temporal asymmetry
from the laws.
13
14

Ney (2009) makes a similar point.
In deterministic versions of quantum mechanics such as Everettianism and Bohmian mechanics,
the evolution of the wave function is always in accord with the Schrödinger equation. However,
this is not so for indeterministic versions such as GRW (see Albert (1992), Maudlin (2019) and
Barrett (2020) for discussion).

