That was the Philosophy of Biology that was: Mainx, Woodger, Nagel, and Logical Empiricism,…

he survived the war to emigrate to Vienna in 1946 and stayed
there for the rest of his career.
The question of who should author the entry on the foundations of biology in the Encyclopedia of Unified Science
was debated by Neurath, Frank, and Carnap in the late 1930s
and 1940s, with Frank preferring Mainx and Carnap initially
preferring Bertalanffy, with the possibility of Hogben or
Woodger as an alternative lurking in the background (Reisch
2005; Hofer 2013). It appears that Mainx was preferred to
Bertalanffy because his work was (correctly) viewed as
being closer to contemporary biology because of its emphasis on genetics and evolution. Because of the long delays
in the publication of the Encyclopedia induced by the war,
Foundations of Biology only appeared in 1955 even though it
was largely completed a decade earlier. Since the content of
this work has entirely been ignored by recent commentators
(including Hofer) some detail is provided below; it should
become apparent that it deserves far more attention from
philosophers of biology than can be devoted to it here.
Foundations of Biology began from a thoroughly logical
empiricist perspective. While biology is a special science,
it is so because of the “observed peculiarity of its object
and ...the development of its own methods of research and
points of view,” and not because of metaphysical (including
ontological) commitments, which are denigrated along with
all efforts to build a “system” of biology (Mainx 1955, p. 2).
Mainx endorsed a criterion of demarcation (testability, interpreted as either verifiability or falsifiability) for the empirical statements of biology but, departing from some logical
empiricist dogma, also endorsed the view that all descriptive
statements are implicitly theory-laden. Ultimately all that
mattered was a statement’s ability to make predictions.
As hypotheses emerge from descriptive statements (which
requires scientific imagination), new hypotheses should ideally be consistent with the “permanent structure of science”
(Mainx 1955, p. 6) and be incorporated into it. A remarkable
discussion followed:
If the incorporation does not succeed without contradiction, then, by a thorough logical analysis of the
contradictory statements and their elements, we must
investigate whether the contradiction is not merely
apparent and whether it cannot be removed by a
logical change. In other cases the contradiction can
be bridged over by means of accessory hypotheses
which restrict or extend the validity of the hypothesis
and which, in turn, must satisfy the requirements of
testability by experience. Naturally, they must not be
introduced only ad hoc, i.e., they must not be merely
tautological or formulated without any connection to
the rest of the system of the relevant science, because
in that case they would in principle be removed from
any testability. On account of their heuristic value

159

they can often give birth to a new development in science. If a far-reaching contradiction persists between
old and new hypotheses, this leads to a “crisis” in the
empirical sciences concerned. This, in turn, leads to
a revision of the system of statements hitherto in use.
(1955, p. 6)
Ideas later typically associated with Kuhn (his Structure of
Scientific Revolutions (1962) was also part of the Encyclopedia) were clearly in the air within the logical empiricist
ambit.
Turning to the content of biology proper, Mainx distinguished between “elementary” and “complex” points of
view, the subdivision being “purely practical” and for convenience of exposition (Mainx 1955, p. 7). These points of
view are methodological in the sense that they represent
approaches taken to the study of biological systems. Somewhat loosely (and Mainx would not have put it this way),
the elementary points of view were consistent with contemporary mechanism; less loosely, the complex points of view
were those typically invoked by the emergentists (see the
third section).
There were three elementary points of view, depending
on whether attention should be directed to visible structure,
behavior, or “significance as a member of a reproductive
chain”:
1. The Morphological Point of View: Under this, Mainx
discussed the process of classification and noted that
it involves theoretical commitments (e.g., claims of
homology) that can be tested. Classification was hierarchical; at the highest level was the “construction plan.”
This is what Woodger had in mind when he introduced
“Bauplan” as a technical term in Anglophone biology
(almost simultaneously to the date when Foundations
of Biology appears to have been written, ca. 1945; see
below).
2. The Physiological Point of View: Physiology was “the
theory of the functions of the organism, of its organs and
tissues, or, better, ...the theory of the processes which
take place in the organism and between the organism and
the environment” (Mainx 1955, p. 15). Mainx’s treatment of it was desultory. Only two points are particularly
salient: (1) There was an extended treatment of “blanket statements” (Pauschalaussage; 1955, p. 17) such as
those about the response of an organism to a stimulus
which are apparently simple statements with very complex backgrounds and applicable to many situations. (2)
He noted the special problems for physiology posed by
the human “inner experience” (1955, p. 19) but left it
for the psychologists to address.
3. The Genetical Point of View: Mainx identified this with
the use of population genetics, especially Mendel’s

13

