154

dismissing logical empiricism’s relevance to the philosophy
of biology—see, for example, Mayr (1988, 2004).
The Cambridge Companion to Logical Empiricism
(Uebel and Richardson 2007a) ignores biology altogether:
there is no chapter on logical empiricism and the philosophy
of biology even though there is a chapter on logical empiricism and the philosophy of physics (Ryckman 2007), which
is not a surprise, but also chapters on the logical empiricism
and the philosophy of psychology (Hardcastle 2007) and the
philosophy of the social sciences (Uebel 2007). The index
has no entry for “biology.” This is particularly surprising
because (Rieppel 2003) had recently demonstrated the influence of Carnap’s (1922) Der Raum and Woodger’s work
(see below) on Hennig’s (1950) formulation of cladistics in
systematics.2
The purpose of this article is to challenge this legacy of
demeaning the relevance of logical empiricism to the philosophy of biology. It will suggest that, once we take theoretical debates amongst the biologists in the 1930s and 1940s
into account, the contributions made by logical empiricists
from the late 1930s till the late 1950s fall centrally within
the conceptual landscape of contemporary work in theoretical biology (what Wolters refers to as “ideology”). Only
slightly more polemically, it will also suggest that some of
the logical empiricist analyses continue to provide insights
even today.
These claims are no longer entirely novel. In particular, Hofer (2002, 2013), Byron (2007), and Nicholson and
Gawne (2014, 2015) have defended related claims. I use and
comment on Hofer’s work below; while she focuses (mostly
appropriately for her biographical purposes) on networks
of personal interactions between the relevant figures, my
concern here is with the intellectual content of the logical
empiricist analyses of biology. Byron’s contribution is to
point out that there was a long and lively tradition within
the philosophy of biology (and not just limited to logical
empiricism) long before the late 1960s when Hull and a
few others are often supposed to have founded the discipline. However, his methodology is entirely bibliometric;
in contrast, the concern of this article is to trace and analyze
the critical philosophical arguments. Nicholson and Gawne
(2014) aim to rehabilitate Woodger. They ignore Nagel and,
by and large, accept the view that logical empiricism was
of little value for the philosophy of biology. (According to
them, although they acknowledge the complexity of this
issue, Woodger should not be treated as a logical empiricist.)
Another difference between their analysis and this article is

2
In response, Uebel (personal communication, August 4, 2014) has
pointed out that when the volume was first being planned around
1998 there was no extant literature documenting attention to biology
on the part of the logical empiricists.

13

S. Sarkar

that, when they consider Woodger’s formal work, Nicholson
and Gawne’s defense of Woodger is largely sociological,
dealing with the reception of Woodger’s work in its contemporary context; in contrast, this article critically examines
the content of Woodger’s most important formal contributions. Nicholson and Gawne (2015) defend organicism in
contrast to logical empiricism as the appropriate philosophy
of biology.
The debates amongst the biologists alluded to earlier,
starting in the late 1920s and continuing through the 1930s
and 1940s, were both scientific and philosophical. The most
important philosophical debate was that between mechanism
and organicism (and, also, to some extent emergentism), and
it dominated theoretical discussions within much of biology
into the 1950s (see the third section). Within the logical
empiricist canon, this debate played itself out in the disagreements between Woodger on the side of the organicists
and Nagel tentatively on the mechanist side. Nagel left a
lasting legacy in his analysis of theory reduction and reductionism. Woodger’s formal analyses revealed (1) the complexity of mereology in the biological context which was
subsequently recognized by contemporary biologists, as well
as (2) problems with the definition of temporal identity for
biological systems. Woodger’s semiformal analysis of a variety of biological concepts, especially those of the Bauplan
and innateness, are perhaps even more important. Nagel also
provided a telling critique of the doctrine of emergence that
remains pertinent today. His analysis of teleology in 1961
was less important and changed radically in the 1970s in
response to the advent of molecular biology—but post-1961
developments are beyond the scope of this article. (The year
1929 was chosen as the beginning of this story because that
was when Woodger’s first philosophical book, Biological
Principles, was published. The year 1961 was chosen as the
end because it saw the publication of Nagel’s Structure of
Science, which is widely regarded as the epitome of logical
empiricist philosophy of science (e.g., see Suppe 1974).)
The discussion below is organized around Wolters’s
claims but that is not because they should be singled out
for special criticism—as noted earlier, such views are commonplace. It is to Wolters’s credit that he crystallized these
views precisely even though they ultimately turn out to be
indefensible. The second section will address the claim that
the “wrong people” addressed biology within logical empiricism. It will show that almost all the relevant logical empiricists had impeccable biological credentials. The next section
turns to the question of the “wrong framework.” It will document the extent to which the debate between mechanism and
organicism dominated philosophical discussions of biology
in the 1930s and 1940s. Thus, the logical empiricists quite
appropriately focused on this issue in the 1940s and 1950s.
Section four will consider whether they asked the “wrong
questions.” It will describe in detail and critically defend

