The Epistemology of Logic

5

was given the dual task of acting both as an instrument for good reasoning and
as an independent area of philosophy studying these principles:
[Logic originated as] a science to discriminate between what is true and what
is false, and to show which reasoning really adheres to the path of valid
argumentative proof . . . Among the various branches of philosophy, logic has
two prerogatives: it has both the honour of coming ﬁrst and the distinction of
serving as an efﬁcacious instrument throughout the whole body. (John of
Salisbury 1955: II.2–5)

To clarify these roles, philosophers in the later Middle Ages introduced a
distinction between (i) logica naturalis, the norms of reasoning humans actually
follow, and (ii) logica artiﬁcialis, the rules laid down by the ﬁeld of logic
(Hoenen 2010). While logica artiﬁcialis constituted a science (scientia) in its
own right, with its own distinct subject matter, the laws it produced were
expected to inform our actual reasoning processes (logica naturalis).2 In other
words, logic was both a science and an instrument. The question, then, was the
extent to which the logica artiﬁcialis of the day, the syllogistic, served this
instrumental role successfully.
Both Descartes and Bacon famously criticised syllogistic logic for failing to
be an effective organon. While for Descartes, the forms were at best pedagogical tools for those still honing their intellectual abilities, not useful for the
already logically clear-minded, for Bacon, the forms were useless in providing
natural philosophers with the means to make novel discoveries; hence the need
for a new Organon (Gaukroger 1989).
Similarly, Locke (1975 [1689]: IV.xvii) criticised the forms for adding little
to our understanding of whether a particular argument is (in)valid. Rather, they
are mere codiﬁcations of those arguments we already deem reasonable through
appreciating the relations between the ideas contained within them. So, if one
does not ﬁnd the instances of the syllogistic forms reasonable to begin with, the
forms themselves will have little elucidatory force. Thus, while correct as
codiﬁcations of these existent acceptable inferences (logic’s role qua science),
the forms fail to serve logic’s instrumental role.
Logic’s dual life is also apparent in the work of advocates for logica artiﬁcialis, who defended the science on the basis that it could effectively guide
reasoning. That artiﬁcial logics are needed to regulate our existing inferential
standards and avoid unnecessary errors:

2

Calling logic a scientiam in the medieval sense of the term should not be confused with the
contemporary thesis that logic is akin to the sciences in various regards, known as antiexceptionalism about logic (Martin & Hjortland 2022). Rather, scientiae were simply systematic
bodies of truths with their own subject matter, derivable from a set of foundational principles.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 189.132.150.226, on 10 Oct 2025 at 03:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009319881

