20

Epistemology

the domain should look like. These may include avoiding a particular sceptical
challenge, respecting the author’s own expectations regarding the metaphysics
of the area, complying with speciﬁc established epistemological assumptions
about rationality, or conforming to historical precedents concerning the domain.
From these background motivations and commitments, one then attempts to
infer an epistemology of the domain that respects these restrictions. Thus,
respecting the restrictions becomes one of, if not the primary, success conditions
for an account of the epistemology of the domain. Giving these philosophical
criteria methodological and evidential primacy is what makes the approach topdown.
A top-down approach is not our only option, however. Rather than beginning
with standing assumptions about the speciﬁc area of knowledge, we can begin
with putative instances of good epistemic practice within the relevant domain.
From these instances, we can then slowly construct an account of the epistemology of the domain, testing these proposals against more and more novel cases
until we ﬁnd a proposal that coheres with the available cases. In other words, a
bottom-up approach. Given that this approach studies the epistemology of a
domain by looking at the activities of its practitioners, it is also commonly
known as a practice-based approach (Dutilh Novaes 2012; Martin 2022).
While the practice-based approach is well-established within the philosophies of science and mathematics, the same is not true of the philosophy of
logic. As we shall see, it is still common within the epistemology of logic to ﬁnd
arguments for proposals based upon their ability to avoid sceptical consequences while respecting the authors’ own favoured philosophical presumptions. What results from this focus on meeting predetermined philosophical
criteria, however, are accounts of logic’s epistemology that tend to oversimplify
the processes involved in the justiﬁcation of logics while problematising the
actual practices of logicians. The result being that use of a top-down approach is
another common cause of our lack of progress in understanding logic’s
epistemology.
The goal of this section is to highlight the beneﬁts of a practice-based
approach to the epistemology of logic. If we desire a detailed account of logic’s
epistemology, we are best off looking at what logicians actually do. Our
justiﬁcation for this claim takes two forms. First, we show the advantages that
the approach has provided for our understanding of the epistemology of the
sciences and mathematics. By analogy, given that logica artiﬁcialis is a research
area just as the sciences are, it would be a surprise if the approach didn’t offer
our understanding of logic’s epistemology similar beneﬁts. We then argue more
directly for the approach when it comes to logic’s epistemology, by showing
that top-down approaches have had negative consequences in the philosophy of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 189.132.150.226, on 10 Oct 2025 at 03:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009319881

