29
eb
B

e*T

e*P
T
P
But the trouble now is that this augmented set of equations won’t have independent
exogenous terms throughout. In particular, the term e*T won’t be independent of e*P, given
that in truth T depends causally on P. (The term e*T will in effect need to compensate for
how P in fact varies in ways that are independent of T.)
Let us say that a system S of equations with exogenous independence is expandable if, for
any further variables correlated with those in S, there is a larger system of equations
covering those further variables that also satisfies exogenous independence and which
embeds the recursive structure of variables in the original equation set S.
The equations (27) displaying birth control pills B and thromboses P as independent are not
so expandable, since any larger set of equations embedding (27) and also covering
pregnancy P will violate the requirement of exogenous independence.
Let me now turn to mutually correlated variables in multivariate normal distributions. As I
said, these allow a multiplicity of differently directed structural equations, not all of which
can match actual causal structure. In these cases too we can dismiss the causally misleading
equations on the grounds that they are not expandable. Note here that we can usefully view
the over-supply of equations with exogenous independence in multivariate normal
distributions as reflecting the way that the bridge principles sometimes fail to determine a
unique causal order from a limited set of correlations. Earlier, in section 6, I pointed out
that, given such underdetermination, a wider set of possible correlations can always suffice
to fix a unique causal order for the variables at issue. If we now assume that such
discriminating correlations involving further variables will always exist whenever we have
mutually correlated variables in multivariate normal distributions, we can infer that only
one of the original sets of equations over the originally correlated variables will be
expandable, namely the one whose equational order matches the causal order fixed by the
discriminating set of correlations. (If some other among the original set of equations were
expandable, then the exogenous independence in the so-expanded equations would imply
the existence of correlations that were inconsistent with the wider set of actual correlations
that together with the bridge principles fix a unique casual order.)
Let me go a bit more slowly, and unpack this with the help of a concrete illustration.
Suppose that some correlated X and Y have a bivariate normal distribution. Then both
(29.1) X = eX
(29.2) Y = aX + eY
and
(30.1) Y = e*Y

