35
This is not the place to pursue this issue. I myself am attracted to an analysis, due to Brad
Weslake (forthcoming), which in effect argues that the requirement of counterfactual
dependence along a path is best understood in terms of chains of INUS conditionship
(where an INUS condition is the familiar notion—insufficient but necessary part of an
unnecessary but sufficient condition—originally due to J.L. Mackie). As Weslake sees it, a
causal model implies that Ca actually caused Ea if the model shows that it was part of an
INUS condition for part of an INUS condition for . . . Ea
The appeal to causal models to decide single-case issues leaves us with issues about the
choice of models. It is one thing to read verdicts about actual causation and counterfactual
dependence off from given causal models. It is another to decide what causal model should
be applied to a given target situation in the first place. To adopt a model is effectively to
place the target situation in a causal field, by implicitly holding the values of any variables
omitted from the model fixed at their actual values. This raises a number of questions. Are
there any objective principles pinning down which variables must be included in a model
used to analyse any given target situation? If not, and the selection of variables is partly a
matter of choice, how far will this lead to variant verdicts about actual causation and
counterfactual dependence? And finally, if such verdicts are so variant, does this signify a
deficiency in the approach in terms of causal models, or should we simply accept that facts
of actual causation and counterfactual dependence are relative to choices of causal field?
17 Causation as a Guide to Action
Let me now return to generic causal claims of the form “C causes E” (“smoking causes
cancer”, “birth control pills causes thromboses”, . . .). I now have argued that such claims
should be understood as saying that C is an ancestor of E in a recursive system of structural
equations with exogenous independence. And I have shown how we can infer such claims,
reliably if not infallibly, from correlations by using the bridge principles.
As I have emphasised in this paper, much quantitative research in the non-experimental
sciences is devoted to inferences of just this kind. What I haven’t discussed, however, is why
we should be so interested in generic claims of the form “C causes E”. The points made in
the last section might make one puzzled about this. We there saw how detailed knowledge
of structural equations in the form of causal models can deliver conclusions about actual
single-case causation and the nearby relation of single-case counterfactual dependence. But
mere knowledge of generic claims of the form “C causes E” is by no means guaranteed to
yield the detailed knowledge required to draw such inferences.
Indeed it will standardly leave us quite in the dark about such single-case dependencies. As
observed earlier, knowing that smoking causes cancer won’t decide whether Joe Blogg’s
cancer was actually caused by his smoking, or even whether it counterfactually depended
on it. To decide these questions we’d need to know about what other variables are
ancestral to cancer in a suitable set of structural equations, and about what values they had
in Joe Blogg’s case, and just knowing that “smoking causes cancer” is likely to leave us highly
ignorant about these matters.

