276

THEJOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

cannot be done; not Horwich, who disclaims the attempt. Who,
then, admits to wanting to define the concept of truth? Well, that is
right. But. But the same ugly urge to define shows up in the guise
of trying to provide a brief criterion, schema, partial but leading
hint, in place of a strict definition. Since Tarski, we are leery of the
word 'definition' when we are thinking of a concept of truth not relativized to a language, but we have not given up the definitional
urge. Thus, I see Horwich's schema on a par in this regardwith Dummett's notion of justified assertability, Putnam's ideally justified assertability, and the various formulations of correspondence and
coherence theories. I see all of them as, if not attempts at definitions in the strict sense, attempts at substitutesfor definitions. In the
case of truth, there is no short substitute.
Now I want to describe what I take to be a fairly radical alternative
to the theories I have been discussing and (with unseemly haste) dismissing. What I stress here is the methodologyI think is required
rather than the more detailed account I have given elsewhere. The
methodology can be characterized on the negative side by saying it
offers no definition of the concept of truth, nor any quasi-definitional clause, axiom schema, or other brief substitute for a definition. The positive proposal is to attempt to trace the connections
between the concept of truth and the human attitudes and acts that
give it body.
My methodological inspiration comes from finitely axiomatized
theories of measurement, or of various sciences, theories that put
clear constraints on one or more undefined concepts, and then
prove that any model of such a theory has intuitively desired properties-that it is adequate to its designed purpose. Since among
the models will be all sorts of configurations of abstract entities,
and endless unwanted patterns of empirical events and objects,
the theory can be applied to, or tested against, such specific phenomena as mass or temperature only by indicating how the theory
is to be applied to the appropriate objects or events. We cannot
demand a precise indication of how to do this; finding a useful
method for applying the theory is an enterprise that goes along
with tampering with the formal theory, and testing its correctness
as interpreted.
We are interested in the concept of truth only because there are
actual objects and states of the world to which to apply it: utterances,
states of belief, inscriptions. If we did not understand what it was for
such entities to be true, we would not be able to characterize the
contents of these states, objects, and events. So in addition to the

This content downloaded from 91.152.182.135 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 22:44:09 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

