268

THEJOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

add? Just the truth-functional compounds (beyond those involving
negation) of the types of sentences already mentioned; these are
true or false on the basis of the truth or falsity of the kinds of sentences already provided for. Of course, Tarski also showed in detail
how the truth or falsity of the first four types of sentences depended
in turn on their structure.
Thus, the classical formulation regarded as an informal characterization is "incomplete" in only a minimal way compared to Tarski's
own work, and is better than Tarski's informal attempts to state the
intuitive idea. Needless to say, someone might question the extent to
which natural languages can be adequately characterized using such
limited resources; but this is a comment equally applicable to Tarski.
Despite his nod in the direction of a correspondence theory, in
which sentences are said to correspond to facts, Tarski ought not to
be considered as giving comfort to serious partisans of correspondence theories, nor should Aristotle. For neither Aristotles's formula nor Tarski's truth definitions introduce entities like facts or
states of affairs for sentences to correspond to. Tarski does define
truth on the basis of the concept of satisfaction, which relates expressions to objects, but the sequences that satisfy sentences are nothing
like the "facts" or "states of affairs" of correspondence theorists,
since if one of Tarski's sequences satisfies a closed sentence, thus
making it true, then that same sequence also satisfies every other
true sentence, and thus also makes it true, and if any sequence satisfies a closed sentence, every sequence does.7
If Tarski is not a correspondence theorist (and he certainly does
not hold a coherence theory or a pragmatic theory or a theory that
bases truth on warranted assertability), is he a deflationist? Here
opinions differ widely: W. V. Quine thinks he is, and so does Scott
Soames. John Etchemendy thinks Tarski simply says nothing about
truth as a semantic concept, and Hilary Putnam, though for somewhat different reasons, agrees.8
If Tarski has said "all there is to say" about truth, as Stephen
Leeds, Paul Horwich, and Soames all contend, and Quine has

7At one time I suggested calling Tarski's concept of truth a correspondence theory on the strength of the role of sequences in satisfying closed sentences, but I
subsequently withdrew the suggestion as misleading. For the suggestion, see "True
to the Facts," in Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation(New York: Oxford, 1984).
For the retraction, see "Afterthoughts, 1987," in A. Malichowski, ed., Reading Rorty
(Cambridge: Blackwell, 1990), pp. 120-38.
8 For references, and further discussion, see my "The Structure and Content of
Truth."

This content downloaded from 91.152.182.135 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 22:44:09 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

