Chapter 7

Designing an Active Learning Environment
Architecture Within a Flipped Classroom
for Developing First Year Student Engineers
Julie McCredden, Carl Reidsema and Lydia Kavanagh

Abstract This case study presents the flipped classroom (FC) as a framework
for a large first-year fundamental engineering practice course (ENGG1200). The
aim was to develop student engineers who would leave the course with both the
required academic knowledge of materials engineering and the practitioner skills
required to apply this knowledge to real-world practices including design, problem-solving, modelling, and professional skills. Using a design approach and
drawing on relevant research, a learning environment was constructed whose
architecture comprised an integrated set of learning components that would
develop within our students the internal mechanisms required for demonstrating
these skills. A central component of the learning environment was an authentic open-ended design project that was completed by multidisciplinary teams.
Implementation of the course using a FC framework allowed contact time with
students to be used for hands-on workshops that developed and scaffolded many
of the practitioner skills necessary for the design project. Out-of-class hours were
used by students for acquiring the necessary academic knowledge required for
the projects, supported by the online learning environment that included modules
and quizzes, an organisational tool (the Learning Pathway), reflections, and extensive additional resources. The course design process, the design solution, and the
evaluation of the course architecture are described in this chapter along with the
characteristics that enabled the learning goals to be achieved. Evaluation revealed
two main clusters of associated activities: one around the online learning activities

J. McCredden (*) · C. Reidsema · L. Kavanagh
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
e-mail: j.mccredden@uq.edu.au
C. Reidsema
e-mail: c.reidsema@uq.edu.au
L. Kavanagh
e-mail: l.kavanagh@uq.edu.au
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
C. Reidsema et al. (eds.), The Flipped Classroom,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3413-8_7

97

