The Once and Future Medicine

often and more powerfully than any other social problem. That image
suggests a moral crusade that is also a public health campaign. The
imagery of disease has tremendous social potency; it eliminates most
moral and political doubts. Stopping an epidemic of typhoid presents
no moral problems, so why should stopping an epidemic of drug
abuse present any? Concerns about individual freedom become irrelevant. Preventing disease has been regarded as a government responsibility for more than a century. National and international systems for
the control of psychoactive drugs developed along with international
institutions devoted to preventing the spread of infectious disease.
Here we act even on remote and indirect possibilities of harm, as

when we require vaccinations. The vocabulary in which we talk about
psychoactive drug use permits a smooth transition from physical and
psychological to moral and finally to social health. Consumer safety
and morality, amalgamated through references to health and disease,
reinforce one another as justifications for control.
But we are much more likely to disagree about what threatens the
moral and social order than about what threatens individual physical
(or even psychological) health. Individual values differ, and causes

are difficult to distinguish from symptoms in the case of such issues
as public tranquility or productivity. As a result, public consensus is
weak and the laws may seem arbitrary. Common sense on this issue
may be nothing more than shared prejudice. Attitudes toward minorities, work, worldly success and failure, sex, and family life may
be the real issues in a controversy about drugs. Drugs are symbols
charged with cultural tension. Repressed anxieties may be displaced
onto drug users as a form of scapegoating. Marihuana, along with
psychedelic drugs, was seen as a catalyst of the antiestablishment
movements of the 1960s and 1970s. Even today, millions of people
simply do not acknowledge the moral authority of the laws against
this drug. Some are ambivalent, some are hypocritical, and some are
openly or secretly in resistance. The government insists on viewing

marihuana as a threat to society, but the very need to use the rhetoric
of war may bea sign that the issue is not settled; obviously, many
people doubt whether this battle is worth fighting.

165

