266

A. Mutch et al.

those who make the effort to ask us questions and seek clarification. It’s an important lesson that I think some students are grappling with (teaching team member diary)
The teaching team’s hard work in developing different padlet questions and encouraging debate mean none of the activities fall flat in the first or subsequent lectures and I get
a sense that students understand that in this class, expectations are different. By the end
of the course, I am left with a strong feeling that the students understand they have been
treated as adults (teaching team member diary)

Four of the five lectorial-based teaching team members (there were nine members in total responsible for delivery, development and marking) had previously
run separate tutorial classes for HSP, but none had experienced a flipped classroom or large-scale collaborative approach. Each team member was responsible
for three groups, moving between them to assist with facilitating discussion and
group exercises, support interactions with technology and answer questions. This
change from being a core driver of discussions and imparter of information, as
practiced in a traditional tutorial, to developing a learning partnership with students, engaging and supporting them to take responsibility for their learning was
the source of frequent discussion and reflection in weekly teaching team meetings.
From the very first lectorial, the teaching team was challenged by the shift in roles
and the demands of a collaborative approach, particularly with how to spread out
time evenly across groups, and ensure students understood the content, assessment
and other core items.
In more traditional tutorials, I am more accepting of student demands because I carry the
responsibility for their learning only on my own shoulders. This new format is confronting in its demands on autonomous learning—for students and for me. I reflect on the contradiction of feeling apologetic about my lack of time for each student and frustrated by
students who don’t seem to be putting in the effort (teaching team member diary)
I don’t feel the same legitimacy to ‘butt into’ discussion or interject when members of
the teams are dominating conversation. I’m quite avoidant of confrontation when I don’t
feel part of a group, and I definitely feel at the periphery of these teams (teaching team
member diary)

A central concern for the team was how to support individuals to engage
and learn in a large collaborative space. Some of these concerns arose from students who were also coming to terms with the need to adapt to the collaborative
approach and accept responsibility for their learning. Some students were initially dependent on the teaching team’s authority and guidance and would anxiously seek the attention of team members to assist as soon as group activities
commenced. Some teaching team members initially reinforced this anxiety and
over-responded; however, as the semester progressed, all parties began to adapt to
their new roles, particularly the student groups who became more self-authorising,
directing and facilitating their own discussions.
I loved how we were forced to participate which assisted in the learning process (student,
SeCat).

Not all students were comfortable with the change in student–teacher dynamic
or the shift in responsibility for learning. This discomfort was expressed by a

