OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 28/05/21, SPi

160

T h e Ge n e’s-Ey e V i ew of Evolut ion

nepotistically towards other individuals at that flower (Madgwick
et al. 2019).
The greenbeard effect should be distinguished from what Dawkins
called the ‘armpit effect’ (Dawkins 1982, p. 146). The latter refers to
situations where an organism recognizes a trait (like odour) in itself,
or in a close relative, and then favours other individuals with the same
trait. As such, it provides a mechanism for traditional kin-­recognition.
Greenbeard genes work to recognize copies of themselves, not of kin.
This is also why the armpit effect is expected to be mediated by high
genome-­wide relatedness, whereas the greenbeard effect relies only
on high relatedness at the locus/loci underlying it.

5.3.1 Why greenbeards should be rare in nature
The conditions for their existence meant that greenbeards were long
thought to be unlikely to exist in nature (Dawkins 1978, 1979;
Grafen 1984). Madgwick et al. (2019) group arguments for why
greenbeards should be rare in natural populations into three categories:
existential, detection, and selection arguments.
The existential argument points out that greenbeards rely on the
assumption that a single gene, or a set of tightly linked genes, can
affect all three phenotypic functions required. This seems unlikely,
especially as the connection of genotype to phenotype will need to
be deterministic, or close to deterministic. Combined, these improbable conditions mean that greenbeards should evolve only very
rarely (West et al. 2007). In response, Haig has noted that there are
several examples of genes, or sets of closely linked genes, that can
recognize themselves in others, including mechanisms like cell–cell
receptors (Haig 1996, 2013). Furthermore, a greenbeard gene does
not need to directly cause the traits; it can achieve its effect by
adjusting the expression of other genes. The kinds of phenotypes
that can be regulated in this way may be limited, which could
explain why many of the best examples of greenbeards come from
microbes, whose simpler genetic architectures can prevent pleiotropic

