

 . 

framework and the classical one cannot be non-competing descriptions of semantics
understood in this sense. That leaves two options open at the start of Section .:
(a) classical truth and falsity are semantic notions, whereas Edgington’s degrees are
not; (b) Edgington’s degrees are semantic notions, whereas classical truth and falsity
are not. In recent work, Edgington endorses a primitivist view about vagueness
that ﬁts well with option (a). She argues for this view by arguing that bivalence
holds without restriction, even in borderline cases, which appears to tell against
option (b). Section .. argues that Edgington’s arguments for bivalence presuppose a substantive thesis about truth. Section .. closes the chapter by arguing that
this thesis is incompatible with option (a). I conclude by suggesting that the best
version of Edgington’s proposal will be a version of option (b).
A note on terminology before I begin. Clarity will be my theoretically neutral
concept for distinguishing borderline cases from the rest. It’s clear that p iff p and it
isn’t borderline whether p; it’s clear that not-p iff not-p and it isn’t borderline whether
p; it’s borderline whether p iff it’s neither clear that p nor clear that not-p. I’ll say that
x is clearly F when it’s clear that x is F. So, for example, scarlet is clearly a shade of red,
pure orange clearly isn’t a shade of red, and somewhere between them in the
spectrum lie shades that are only borderline shades of red (and borderline shades
of orange too).

. Edgington’s Proposal
This section introduces Edgington’s view: Section .. outlines her account of the
connectives; Section .. turns to validity; Section .. looks at the sorites. My
primary source is ‘Vagueness by degrees’.¹

.. The framework
Edgington’s view has four key features. Firstly, her approach is degree-theoretic:
sentences are assigned degrees, represented by real numbers in [,]. Edgington calls
these degrees verities. Throughout, the number assigned to a sentence A will be v(A).²
Secondly, verities are not degrees of truth, or new truth-values in competition with
the classical two; verities are degrees of closeness to clear truth.³ Sections .–.
examine the relation between verity and truth-value in more detail. Thirdly, greater
numbers represent closer proximity to clear truth, with  as clear truth and  as clear
falsity. Fourthly, the connectives and verities interact via the probabilistic rules:
vð¬AÞ ¼ 1  vðAÞ:
vðA ∨ BÞ ¼ vðAÞ þ vðBÞ  vðA ∧ BÞ:
vðA ∧ BÞ ¼ vðAÞ  vðB j AÞ:
Here, v(Bj A) is the conditional verity of B given A:
¹ Edgington (), henceforth ‘VbD’.
² I use ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ as metalinguistic variables ranging over sentences, and ‘p’, ‘q’, ‘r’ as object-language
propositional constants (though I’ll also sometimes use them as placeholders for sentences in the bodytext).
³ VbD, p. ; Edgington, MS, §§, ; Edgington, , pp. –.

