54

Epistemology

proﬁciency to take up information about the presence of blue things. Likewise,
in the Degas case, my ability to learn from testimony is a proﬁciency with the
function of generating testimonial knowledge via a contained proﬁciency to
take up testimonial information – here that you like Degas. It is these information-uptake proﬁciencies that are key to making room for external defeat, as
I will explain in what follows.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009161022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6.5 External Defeat
With these points on proﬁciencies and their normative import in play, let’s
return to external defeat. In what follows, I will outline how proﬁciencies – and,
in particular, information-uptake proﬁciencies – can pave the way towards
a better account of external defeat.
To begin with, note that the norm that corresponds to the proper functioning
of information-uptake proﬁciencies is a genuinely epistemic norm. This is
because it derives from a genuinely epistemic function of epistemic proﬁciencies, that is, ultimately, the production of knowledge that is the function of the
proﬁciencies of which information-uptake proﬁciencies are constituents (Kelp
2023; Simion 2021).
Second, this epistemic norm is a norm one may fail to live up to without
forming any belief or taking up any contents at all. For instance, in the case in
which I am looking at a blue dot on a white background, my epistemic ability to
perceptually recognise blue things contains a proﬁciency which, when functioning epistemically properly, will take up the content (and, under normal
conditions, the information) that the dot is blue upon being presented with
a blue dot on a white background. If I fail to take up the content that the dot is
blue, I am in violation of this norm. Similarly, in the testimony case, my ability
to learn from testimony involves a proﬁciency to take up information. When it
functions epistemically properly, it will take up the content (and, under normal
conditions, the information) that you like Degas upon me being told that you do.
If I fail to take up the content that you like Degas, I violate this norm.
Recall what I take to be the crucial problem with external defeat for virtue
epistemology, that is, that the normative framework it employs, telic normativity, is too limited in that it doesn’t allow us to assess attempts that one hasn’t
made. We can now see that my distinctively functionalist version of virtue
epistemology, in conjunction with proﬁciencies, allows us to make progress on
this problem. This is because the functions of epistemic proﬁciencies give us
norms that are genuinely epistemic and that one may violate without forming
beliefs or even taking up any contents at all. And that is exactly what telic
normativity-based virtue epistemology failed to do.

