Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 13:00 10 March 2015

Annette C. Baier
parental role that is relevant, and some of those who dislike her
book are worried precisely by this uncertainty. Some find it retrograde to hail as a special sort of moral wisdom an outlook that
may be the product of the socially enforced restriction of women
to domestic roles (and the reservation of such roles for them alone).
For that might seem to play into the hands of those who still favor
such restriction. (Marxists, presumably, will not find it so surprising that moral truths might depend for their initial clear voicing
on the social oppression, and memory of it, of those who voice
the truths.) Gilligan did in the first chapter of D.V. cite the theory
of Nancy Chodorow (as presented in The Reproduction of Mothering
[Berkeley 1978]) which traces what appears as gender differences
in personality to early social development, in particular to the effects of the child's primary caretaker being or not being of the
same gender as the child. Later, both in 'The Conquistador and
the Dark Continent: Reflections on the Nature of Love' (Daedalus
[Summer 1984]), and 'The Origins of Morality in Early Childhood'
(in press), she develops this explanation. She postulates two evils
that any infant may become aware of, the evil of detachment or
isolation from others whose love one needs, and the evil of relative powerlessness and weakness. Two dimensions of moral development are thereby set - one aimed at achieving satisfying
community with others, the other aiming at autonomy or equality
of power. The relative predominance of one over the other development will depend both upon the relative salience of the two
evils in early childhood, and on early and later reinforcement or
discouragement in attempts made to guard against these two evils.
This provides the germs of a theory about why, given current customs of childrearing, it should be mainly women who are not content with only the moral outlook that she calls the justice
perspective, necessary though that was and is seen by them to
have been to their hard won liberation from sexist oppression.
They, like the blacks, used the language of rights and justice to
change their own social position, but nevertheless see limitations
in that language, according to Gilligan's findings as a moral psychologist. She reports their discontent with the individualist more
or less Kantian moral framework that dominates Western moral
theory and which influenced moral psychologists such as Lawrence
44

