44

Epistemology

5.5 Conclusion
This section has developed a novel account of defeat for virtue epistemology.
I have developed an account of defeaters as evidence that attempting, or at least
attempting in a certain way, is unsuccessful. In addition, I argued for an account
of defeat that is normative in that a defeater defeats some justiﬁcation one has
when it is epistemically proper for one to have the defeater. I showed that this
account can accommodate plausible cases in which defeat undermines competence of attempts both in epistemology and beyond.

6 Virtue Epistemology and External Defeat

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009161022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6.1 Introduction
The previous section developed a virtue epistemological account of defeat. One
key idea is that in cases of defeat, the ranges of the abilities required for justiﬁed
belief shift. A second key idea is that defeaters are evidence that attempting, or
at least attempting in a certain way, isn’t successful. A third key idea is that
defeaters undermine justiﬁcation (by shifting ranges of abilities) if and only if it
is epistemically proper for one to have them.
This section aims to show how the virtue epistemological view can accommodate external defeat. The ﬁrst and the second key ideas of the view work in
exactly the same way as for internal defeat. What will require special attention is
the third key idea. In cases of internal defeat, what happens is that we know or
justiﬁably believe the relevant defeaters. More generally, in cases of internal
defeat, the reason why it is epistemically proper for us to have the defeaters we
have is that we stand in some (epistemically proper) psychological relation to
them. Of course, since cases of external defeat are cases in which we do not
stand in any psychological relation to the relevant defeaters, this story won’t
work for external defeat. Accordingly, one way of framing the central task for
this section is that it aims to develop an account of the conditions under which it
is epistemically proper for us to have defeaters when we do not stand in some
psychological relation to them. As we will see, this is no easy task, especially for
standard versions of virtue epistemology.
With these points in play, here is the order of business for this section. I ﬁrst
argue that cases of external defeat mean trouble for standard versions of virtue
epistemology (Section 5.2). To make room for external defeat, the ﬁrst step is to
develop a distinctively functionalist version of virtue epistemology (Section 5.3).

and even successful because of ability. What’s more, once you come to know, subsequent shots
may well be competent and apt. Crucially, however, this is because now you have a defeater for
the defeater provided by the testimony.

