Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 13:00 10 March 2015

The Need for More than Justice
even of some fear for the respected, and where personal autonomy
and independence, rather than more satisfactory interdependence,
are the paramount values.
This contrast, one cannot but feel, is one which Gilligan might
have used the Marxist language of alienation to make. For the main
complaint about the Kantian version of a society with its first virtue
justice, construed as respect for equal rights to formal goods such
as having contracts kept, due process, equal opportunity including
opportunity to participate in political activities leading to policy and
law-making, to basic liberties of speech, free association and assembly, religious worship, is that none of these goods do much to ensure that the people who have and mutually respect such rights will
have any other relationships to one another than the minimal relationship needed to keep such a 'civil society' going. They may well
be lonely, driven to suicide, apathetic about their work and about
participation in political processes, find their lives meaningless and
have no wish to leave offspring to face the same meaningless existence. Their rights, and respect for rights, are quite compatible with
very great misery, and misery whose causes are not just individual
misfortunes and psychic sickness, but social and moral impoverishment.
What Gilligan's older male subjects complain of is precisely this
sort of alienation from some dimly glimpsed better possibility for
human beings, some richer sort of network of relationships. As one
of Gilligan's male subjects put it, 'People have real emotional needs
to be attached to something, and equality does not give you attachment. Equality fractures society and places on every person the burden of standing on his own two feet' (D.V., 167). It is not just the
difficulty of self reliance which is complained of, but its socially 'fracturing' effect. Whereas the younger men, in their college years, had
seen morality as a matter of reciprocal non-interference, this older
man begins to see it as reciprocal attachment. 'Morality is ... essential ... for creating the kind of environment, interaction between people, that is a prerequisite to the fulfillment of individual goals. If
you want other people not to interfere with your pursuit of whatever
you are into, you have to play the game,' says the spokesman for
traditional liberalism (D.V. 98). But if what one is 'into' is interconnexion, interdependence rather than an individual autonomy that

47

