Introduction



objects of our experience are to be understood as combinations or constructions of those data. When questioned as to whether things could exist
unobserved, such as a crater on the far side of the moon, a phenomenalist
may contend that our suspicion that such things exist (which cannot be
true, by the phenomenalist’s lights) is best accounted for by our commitment to truths such as <If you were to be on the moon at a certain time
and location, you would have a crater-like sense impression>, which is not
committed to the existence of unobserved entities. And indeed, this
counterfactual may be true. But what accounts for its truth? Why is this
counterfactual true rather than false? The realist who has no ontological
qualms about unobserved craters has the beginnings of an answer: the
counterfactual is true, at least in part, in virtue of the existence of the
crater. Phenomenalists have no such option available, given that their
ontology is limited to the set of actual sense impressions. Armstrong
detects similar strategies at work in behaviorism about mental states, and
operationalism about quantities (a: ). David Lewis contends that
the same sort of argument can be wielded against presentists (which I take
up in Chapter ), and those who take the distinction between lawgoverned and accidental regularities to be primitive (Lewis : ).
Here we see the truthmaker theorist’s call for honest accounting come into
play. It’s not just what we believe that makes our theories tolerable; also
relevant is the sort of ontology that is needed to ground the truths of
those theories.
Other views that rely on counterfactuals face similar challenges. Take,
for instance, Crispin Wright’s metaethical view (, ; see also
Lynch , chapter ). For Wright, what it is for a moral judgment to
be true is for it to be superassertible, which it achieves when it is “warranted
and some warrant for it would survive arbitrarily close scrutiny of its
pedigree and arbitrarily extensive increments to or other forms of improvement of our information” (: ). Wright’s hope is that the superassertibility account of moral truth allows one to dodge commitments to
the moral facts and properties peddled by moral realists; he’s interested in
developing an antirealist approach to ethics that nevertheless preserves the
existence of moral truth. Suppose it’s true that it’s morally wrong to eat
animals. Then, on Wright’s view, the belief that it’s morally wrong to
eat animals is warranted, and its warrant would survive in the face of any
improvement to our cognitive state. Wright is then hopeful that a fruitful
account of warrant is in the oﬃng (one which, it’s important to note,
cannot in any way presuppose the notion of truth, which is what’s
currently being analyzed). Because this account makes no reference to

