2. If everyone believed with the Hindus that every individual soul is really a manifestation of the divine soul, wouldn’t it transform human relationships? Would hatred, war,
and racism be possible in the light of that belief?
3. How would your personality, times of diminished self-esteem, or self-doubt be
transformed if you believed as Hindus do that below the surface of your personality you
are really identical with the soul of God?
4. To what degree would you find release from emotional suffering if you adopted the
Buddhist perspective of floating on the surface of life’s waves instead of letting them engulf you? If you viewed your daily hurts, frustrations, and sorrows as though they were as
temporal and ephemeral as yesterday’s shadows, wouldn’t this view make a significant
difference to your life?

Negative Evaluation
1. Hindu thought claims that Brahman (God) transcends language, reason, and the
laws of logic. For this reason, Hindus describe Brahman in contradictory terms (personal and impersonal, other than the world and identical with it). And yet in making this
claim, don’t they assume that our logic and conceptual categories are applicable to Brahman? For example, Hindus use the law of excluded middle in assuming that reason either
is or is not applicable to Brahman.* They also use the law of contradiction in assuming
that Brahman cannot be both limited and not limited.**
2. Hindu pantheism claims that the individual self is really one with the universe,
while the Buddhist no-self doctrine claims that the self is an illusion. But how is it that
within this unified, undifferentiated universe, aspects of this universe arose that suffer
from the illusion of an individual self? To the degree that my beliefs are false, I genuinely
am something apart from the rest of the fabric of reality. How can I be one with the universe, as these Asian philosophies claim, at the same time that my beliefs alienate me
from the way the universe is?
3. Certainly the Buddhist is correct to point out that we would be happier and more
content if we let go of some of our self-obsessive cravings and desires. But throughout
history there have been creative geniuses who were driven by the thirst to achieve success
or to accomplish some sort of personal goal. Many of these people have had enormous
egos at the same time they made enormous contributions to humanity. From these personal desires and strivings, for example, have come great inventions or advances in medicine and science that have reduced human suffering, enriched our lives, and advanced
civilization. Wouldn’t the world and the quality of human life have been poorer if these
history-changing people had done nothing but led contemplative lives and abandoned
their strivings and thirst to achieve their individual goals? Is desire the problem in human
life (as Buddhism claims) or only wrongly directed desires?
4. Buddhism teaches that we should neutralize our emotions and live a life of detachment from everything that is passing. In the 1960s, folk singer Paul Simon wrote a song
in which his fictional character sang, “I am a rock, I am an island. And a rock feels no
pain; and an island never cries.”86 Although a rock (a person who strives for detachment)
is invulnerable to pain, he or she also is closed to the possibility of love and could never
have a deep friendship, be an effective parent, or become emotionally involved in the
fight for a just cause. Aren’t there times when directed passion is appropriate and
­justified (e.g., when a person is fighting social injustice)?
*The law of excluded middle: for any property A, something is either A or not-A.
**The law of contradiction: for any property A, something cannot be both A and not-A.
Rethinking the Western Tradition: Asian Religions

393

