“But a more traditional line of thought is indicated by St. Augustine…, who
attributes much of the evil we find to Satan or to Satan and his cohorts…
Satan rebelled against God and has since been wreaking whatever havoc
he can. The result is natural evil. So the natural evil we find is due to free
actions of nonhuman spirits.
– Alvin Plantinga, God, Freedom, and Evil
In this extract, Plantinga is talking about the logical problem of evil (see
above) specifically. He isn’t arguing this is the actual explanation of natural
evils, only that it is a possible explanation:
Augustine is presenting what I earlier called a theodicy, as opposed to a
defense. He believes that in fact natural evil (except for what can be
attributed to God’s punishment) is to be ascribed to the activity of beings
that are free and rational but nonhuman. The Free Will Defender, of course,
does not assert that this is true; he says only that it is possible… He points to
the possibility that natural evil is due to the actions of significantly free but
nonhuman persons. We have noted that there is no inconsistency in the
idea that God could not have created a world with a better balance of moral
good over moral evil than this one displays. Something similar holds here;
possibly natural evil is due to the free activity of nonhuman persons; and
possibly it wasn’t within God’s power to create a set of such persons whose
free actions produced a greater balance of good over evil.”
– Alvin Plantinga, God, Freedom, and Evil
As mentioned above, to defeat the logical problem of evil just requires a
conceivable and logically possible explanation of evils. And so, with that
standard in mind, this response seems successful: It could be the case that
natural evil is the result of the free will of nonhuman agents like demons and
Satan. Plantinga’s free will defence gives a logically consistent explanation
of why God might permit both moral and natural evils.
However, when faced with the evidential problem of evil (above), critics
would argue it seems unlikely that every instance of suffering as the result of
natural evil is tied to some necessary greater good of the free will of

