orphans, there will be small thanks to you. No man should bring children into the
world who is unwilling to persevere to the end in their nurture and education. . . .
socrates: Dear Crito, your zeal is invaluable, if a right one; but if wrong, the greater
the zeal the greater the evil; and therefore we ought to consider whether these
things shall be done or not. For I am and always have been one of those natures
who must be guided by reason, whatever the reason may be which upon reflection
appears to me to be the best; and now that this fortune has come upon me, I cannot
put away the reasons which I have before given: the principles which I have hitherto
honored and revered I still honor, and unless we can find other and better principles
on the instant, I am certain not to agree with you. . . .
Let us consider the matter together, and either refute me if you can, and I will be
convinced; or else cease, my dear friend, from repeating to me that I ought to
escape against the wishes of the Athenians: for I am extremely desirous to be persuaded by you, but not against my own better judgment. . . .
crito: I will do my best.
socrates: Are we to say that we are never intentionally to do wrong, or that in one

way we ought and in another way we ought not to do wrong, or is doing wrong
always evil and dishonorable? Are all our former admissions which were made
within a few days to be thrown away? And have we, at our age, been earnestly discoursing with one another all our life long only to discover that we are no better
than children? Or are we to rest assured, in spite of the opinion of the many, and in
spite of consequences whether better or worse, of the truth of what was then said,
that injustice is always an evil and dishonor to him who acts unjustly? Shall we
affirm that?
crito: Yes.
socrates: Then we must do no wrong?
crito: Certainly not.
socrates: When we are injured should we injure in return, as the many imagine. Or
must we injure no one at all?
crito: Clearly not.
socrates: Again, Crito, may we do evil?
crito: Surely not, Socrates.
socrates: And what of doing evil in return for evil, which is the morality of the
many—is that just or not?
crito: Not just.
socrates: For doing evil to another is the same as injuring him?
crito: Very true.
socrates: Then we ought not to retaliate or render evil for evil to anyone, whatever evil

we may have suffered from him. But I would have you consider, Crito, whether you
really mean what you are saying. For this opinion has never been held, and never will
be held, by any considerable number of persons; and those who are agreed and those
who are not agreed upon this point have no common ground, and can only despise
one another when they see how widely they differ. Tell me, then, whether you agree
with and assent to my first principle, that neither injury nor retaliation nor warding
off evil by evil is ever right. And shall that be the premise of our argument? Or do
you decline and dissent from this? For this has been of old and is still my opinion;

Civil Disobedience

615

