108

The Gödelian Symphony

(1) undecidability as a property of formulas with (2) undecidability as
a feature of formal systems.
(1) The first property, which we know well by now, is always relative to a given formal system S: to assert that α is undecidable in S is to
maintain that, in S, α is not provable and not refutable, that is, such that
its negation is not provable either.This does not rule out α being provable (therefore decidable) elsewhere. This point has already been
flagged before, and it depends on the following simple remark: talk of
formally absolutely undecidable formulas is sort of meaningless. Of
course, mathematicians harmlessly claim to have proved, or refuted,
some mathematical statement or other, feeling no need to add any qualification. What is at issue in this case, though, is what I have dubbed
“intuitive” mathematics. On the other hand, given any formula α, one
can always build a formal system in which that formula is provable
(provable, that is, in the formal sense – in the sense of proof theory).
One can always construct (or find) a formal system that has α as a theorem, at the very least because the axioms of formal systems are theorems; this is one of the cases in which the terminology of formal
systems departs from that of informal mathematics, where if something
is an axiom, it is not a theorem, that is, the conclusion of a proof.
Therefore, building a formal system having α as an axiom is sufficient
to obtain, trivially, that α is provable (therefore decidable) in that formal system, in spite of its being undecidable somewhere else.9
(2) Undecidability in the second sense, on the other hand, is a
property of any formal system S whose set of theorems is not decidable, that is, given Church’s Thesis, recursive. Given a formula α in the
language L of S, there is no effective procedure terminating in a finite
number of steps which allows us to decide whether α is a theorem of
S or not. Now our Typographical Number Theory is an undecidable
formal system in this sense. The Fundamental Property of formal systems, recall, prescribes that the set of theorems of a real formal system
9

This is already an “immediate consequence” about which some philosophers might
complain – Wittgensteinians, for instance. Wittgenstein thought it absurd to claim that
the same formula α is undecidable in some formal system, but decidable in some other.
When we modify a system, according to Wittgenstein, α is not the same formula anymore (that is, it cannot retain the same meaning it had in the previous system), even
though it stays typographically identical. I shall talk about this peculiar Wittgensteinian
stance in the final chapter of the book.

9781405197663_4_007.indd 108

7/22/2009 7:42:10 PM

