xx

Acknowledgments

and Gödelian issues. Thanks also to Paul Redding and Mark Colyvan of
the University of Sydney, Greg Restall of the University of Melbourne,
and Ross Brady and Andrew Brennan of La Trobe for support of the most
varied kind. Part of the material included in Chapter 12 was presented at
the Fourth World Congress on Paraconsistency held in Melbourne in
July 2008; I am grateful to all participants and especially to J.C. Beall, Koji
Tanaka, Zach Weber, Diderik Batens, and Francesco Paoli for comments,
encouragement, and enjoyable discussions.
In the US I am indebted, to begin with, to Vittorio Hösle of the
University of Notre Dame: during the scholarship I was offered in 2006,
I proposed for the first time my Gödelian reflections in a seminar
on the philosophy of mind of the twentieth century, and parts of
that talk now appear in Chapter 11. I am grateful to David Leech,
Gregor Damschen, Dennis Monokroussos, Dae-Joong Kwon, Miguel
Perez, Ricardo Silvestre, Fernando Suàrez, and Nora Kreft for lively discussion and comments during that hot Indiana summer. Next, I am
most grateful to Achille Varzi of Columbia, NY, for his wonderful support throughout these years and his very encouraging comments on
the manuscript of the book.
Thanks to the professors and researchers of various Italian universities for their efforts to support me in the precarious circumstances of
academic life:Vero Tarca, Luigi Perissinotto, Luca Illetterati, Max Carrara,
Franco Chiereghin, Antonio Nunziante, Francesca Menegoni, Giuseppe
Micheli, Andrea Tagliapietra, Michele Di Francesco, Emanuele Severino,
Andrea Bottani, Richard Davies, Mauro Nasti,Vincenzo Vitiello, Massimo
Adinolfi, and Franca d’Agostini.
Thanks to Enrico Moriconi and Dario Palladino for their invaluable
textbook expositions of Gödel’s Theorem – a secure guide both for
beginners and for advanced scholars.
Finally, very special thanks to Diego Marconi, whose philosophical
work has influenced me so much in so many ways; and to Marcello
Frixione, the amazing Matt Plebani, and Blackwell’s anonymous
referee, for accurate and extensive comments to the contents of the
whole book.

9781405197663_3_posttoc.indd xx

7/20/2009 8:29:53 PM

