70

The Structure of Scientific Inference

similarity is not to be eliminated by counting or measuring intensional
properties, but for different reasons from his. In his account this suggestion
is an abortive attempt to eliminate similarity, · first by definition in terms of
extensional classes of objects, which as he rightly argues leads to a vacuous
similarity relation in which all pairs of objects are equally simple, and then
by rejecting intensional properties as no more economical than the many­
dimensional relation of similarity itself. But in our account we are not looking
for economy but accurate analysis, in which similarity is not eliminated by
intensional properties but recognized as having intensional property­
dimensions.
Similar remarks apply to Goodman's proof that similarity of objects in
virtue of shared properties cannot be used to give an extensional definition of
properties. For example, the three pairs of three objects a, b, c may be equally
similar in sharing at least one property, for instance PQ(a), QR(b) , RP(c),
but this does not serve to define any one property as an extensional similarity
class. Our concept of similarity here, however, is not required to provide any
such definition, for it is already assumed that we know that these pairs of
objects are similar in three different respects, and indeed the property Q, for
example, could be defined on this view of similarity as that which a and b
have in common, and not c. Similarity is a relation between objects in respect
of a certain property, not a relation between objects as such.
It may be concluded that Goodman's strictures do not capture the concept
of similarity required by the network model, and are not inconsistent with
that concept.
VII. Absolute universals again

Let us now return for a moment to the theory of absolute universals and ask
whether it can be maintained in any sense in the light of the process of initial
classification and modification by coherence conditions that has been
described. It might be suggested that the theory of absolute universals has to
face the problem of modifications in any case, for this is the problem of
errors or illusions or recognition. The mirage 'looks like' the oasis, but no one
who believes in absolute universals would regard himself as committed to the
view that they therefore both share in absolute oasishood. However, the
situation in the network model aggravates the problem. For it has been
argued that P may come to be regarded as incorrectly predicated of a in cases
where there is neither radical change of meaning of P nor illusion, but in
virtue of further evidence and resulting theory changes. That whales were
for long described as fish, or all species of mice as members of the same
family, is not usually regarded as the result of error of recognition or illusion,
nor was the description of the two 'companion stars' of Saturn that were
later recognized as part of Saturn's rings. Or rather, if these are said to be

