230

Jan Barmark and Goran Walldn

The process of delivering data was looked upon in different ways by
modellers and empirical scientists. The modellers needed data quickly for
their work. The empirical scientists, on the other hand, were eager to get
longer series of measurements in order to get data which could fulfil their
criteria of knowledge. The criteria of the empirical scientists were not taken
from the modeller’s paradigms but came from their own disciplines with their
data-criteria.
You have to have large series of data, which take time to handle statistically in order to
confirm reliability. This side has been underrated. (3)

For some scientists, the task of being a data deliverer was thus problematical.
Time and again they had to choose between the demands for fast results for
the project, and their own demands, which were to continue a productive line
of research by continuing to do experiments and take measurements.
We didn’t like the methods that were supposed to be used for the first data needed in the
project. We wanted to work out our own methods and had to fight very hard to do so
because it would then take time to get any data at all. (3)

For other scientists, the research role as data deliverer was not a negative
experience. These scientists, on the other hand, had very vague ideas of the
general goals of the project. There was a lot of scepticism and uncertainty
between the two main group of scientists, the modellers and the empirical
scientists.
Many of the empirical scientists look upon us as some kind of flagship of figurehead
sitting at the prow, making the wave glimmer in the sunshine, but think there is no
concrete need lor us in the practical scientific work. This view is rather common among
many of the empirical scientists.
There has been some difficulty for the project leaders to understand why certain em¬
pirical data are needed and to get enough money for this. It is not a matter of only
saying that we want to have the data by a certain day and we except you to deliver it.
Methods of obtaining the data must also be found. For some of the physiologists it took
perhaps one year to get the equipment in order.
It often happened that we in the process of making models had a shortage of certain
information .... The measuring programmes were perhaps often too heavy. We have
several examples that show that they actually should have been cut off. It is a question
of encroachment on the individual scientist .... This must be said to be a weakness of
the project, there should have been better interaction between model and reality.

