control and self-control

116

Maximum information (1 bit) is obtained when 𝑝 = 1/2, i.e. when a
“yes” and a “no” are equally probable. Now we can refine our notion of “1
bit of information”. This is the information contained in a digit that may
take on only two values provided both values are equally probable.
It follows that the best strategy in the Bar Kohba game is to ask “yes” or
“no” questions, the answers to which are nearly or equally probable. Recall the
question: “Is the surname listed from 17 to 32?” Here the answers “yes” and
“no” are equally probable because there are 32 pupils and the numbers from
17 to 32 cover half of the pupils. Therefore, the answer to this question gives 1
bit of information. But for the question: “Is the surname listed from 1 to 8?”
the range of numbers only covers a quarter of all the numbers and therefore
the probability of a “yes” is 1/4, while that of a “no” is 3/4. The answer to this
question would contain less than 1 bit of information. According to (3.3), in
which we substitute 𝑃 = 1/4, each answer contains 0.8 bit of information.
Once again I emphasize that control processes should be regarded in a
dialectical unity with the random processes of disorganization. There is a
deep relationship between information theory and probability theory. The
Shannon formula (3.2) illustrates this point. The probabilistic approach provides a scientific, objective notion of information that is free from a subjective
substitution of the quantity of information by its significance or importance.

1

0

1/2

1

Figure 3.6: Graph of Shannon distribution.

p

Information in communication channels with noise. When information is transmitted, some loss is unavoidable. This happens because of the
action of random factors, which are commonly lumped together as noise. A
communication channel for transmitting information from input set 𝐴 to
output set 𝐵 is represented in Figure 3.7. The information is affected by noise
𝑃 as it is transmitted. Suppose that 𝜉 is an input discrete random variable
which may assume values 𝑥1 , 𝑥2 , 𝑥3 , … , 𝑥𝛮 . with probabilities 𝑝1 , 𝑝2 , 𝑝3 , … , 𝑝𝛮 ,
and 𝜂 is the output variable, which may assume values 𝑦1 , 𝑦2 , 𝑦3 , … , 𝑦𝛭 . with
probabilities 𝑞1 , 𝑞2 , 𝑞3 , … , 𝑞𝛭 . Let 𝑃𝑖 (𝑗) denote the probability that 𝜉 = 𝑦𝑗
is the output variable if 𝜉 = 𝑥𝑖 was transmitted. The probability 𝑃𝑖 (𝑗) is

