196

Thinking with Objects

Figure 7.3. Borelli’s pendulum (Theoricae Mediceorum planetarum). Borelli claimed that the speed
of a body moving along the arcs BC or BE is the same, although the angular distance covered in the
same time is greater over BE than BC. He tried to prove this statement by arguing that the speed of
a bob would be the same whether AB is free or hindered by a nail in D. The idea of using a nail in
D to shorten the pendulum is clearly borrowed from the third day of the Discorsi (ﬁg. 3.16). Borelli
claimed that the bob would reach point G. Surprisingly, he did not state that C and G should be at
the same height, but rather claimed on the basis of experience that the angles GD̂B and BÂC are
inversely as the square roots of the lengths of the pendulums, 兹AB:兹DB. From here Borelli argued that the speeds of the pendulum are equal and also that without external inﬂuences, the speed
of an orbiting body would be constant and the body would traverse equal distances in equal times at
diﬀerent distances from the center. The analogy between the vertical pendulum and an orbiting
body is problematic, however, because an orbiting body at a constant distance from the center has a
constant speed, whereas the speed of the pendulum varies at each point.

In the case of orbiting bodies, however, we see that their speeds are not constant
but rather increase closer to the central body, whether the sun or a planet. Thus
Borelli argued that the light of the rotating sun pushes the planets with a force inversely as the distance, much as Jupiter does with its satellites. Here Borelli
seemed unconcerned that Jupiter is not a luminous body like the sun. At this point
he had recourse to the impact laws and implicitly criticized Descartes for refusing
to accept that a large body cannot be set in motion by a smaller one. The action of
the central body is assimilated to a lever, increasing further the barrage of mechanical analogies. Borelli argued that the rotation of the central body, either the
sun or Jupiter, moves orbiting bodies with an equal force, opposed by the body’s resistance. Since the resistance increases with the distance from the center, the cir-

