Projected, Oscillating, and Orbiting Bodies

191

nents of curvilinear motion. What was at stake was the primacy of rectilinear over
curvilinear motion in the new worldview and the nature and location of an outward, or centrifugal, tendency or force. On the latter issue I identify two investigative traditions, one prevalent on the Continent and the other in England.
I ﬁrst address the analyses of the motion of the satellites of Jupiter put forward
by Fabri and Borelli in the mid-1660s. Whereas Fabri relied on projectile motion,
Borelli used a wide set of tools ranging from the lever to the pendulum. Section
7.3 investigates a debate on the trajectory of falling bodies on a moving Earth, focusing on the views of Borelli and degli Angeli. Both examined the case whereby
the falling body is projected in the direction of rotation and relied on the conical
pendulum. We have seen in chapter 4 that this problem had been debated in the
aftermath of Galileo’s Dialogo and continued to attract scholarly attention well
after the time covered here. Section 7.4 examines the debates on the trajectory of
projectiles in a resisting medium in Italy, England, and France, from the Cimento
Academy to James Gregory and Blondel. Section 7.5 deals with the main work on
mechanics before Newton’s Principia, Huygens’s Horologium oscillatorium, which
put forward a sophisticated new theory of the vertical and the conical pendulum.
Section 6 explores the studies of orbital motion in England by Hooke, Wren, Wallis, Newton, and Flamsteed. Initially Wallis, Hooke, and Wren explored the motions of planets and satellites using an analogy with the conical pendulum.
In this chapter mathematics takes on a signiﬁcant role, in two respects. Some of
the changes occurring in mathematics were becoming increasingly relevant to
mechanics. In the case of Huygens’s Horologium oscillatorium, a new curve—the
cycloid—entered the scene; but this was not an isolated case, since many areas of
study, from centers of oscillation to the motion of projectiles in resisting media,
required increasingly sophisticated tools. Moreover, mathematics could be used in
diﬀerent ways with regard to physical causes. For example, gravity could be explored having recourse to its causes, as Huygens did at a debate at the Paris
Académie, or purely in mathematical terms, as he did in Horologium oscillatorium. The same applies to several scholars, such as Newton up to the mid-1680s,
who considered gravity mathematically and at the same time ﬁrmly believed in a
physical mechanism such as a ﬂuid medium generating it. These diﬀerent approaches were to emerge as a major theme later in the century.

7.2. The Analyses of Orbital Motion by Fabri and Borelli
It should come as no surprise to ﬁnd astronomy closely tied to mechanics and
the science of motion, since this link was already present in Galileo and the following generation, notably Gassendi. The study of the trajectory of planets, satel-

