Now you know something about why we need arguments, what arguments are, how to analyse
them, how to evaluate them and how to recognize fallacies. What next?
First, admit your limits. This short book has barely scratched the surface. You have seen some
purposes of arguments, some words in arguments, some valid forms of argument, some kinds of
induction and some fallacies. That is a lot to have covered, but please do not imagine that you
know it all. Nobody does.
Second, learn more. To understand arguments and reasons fully will take a lifetime. In addition
to exploring further kinds of arguments,1 we all need to know more about language (our shared
means of communication), science (including psychology and economics), mathematics
(especially statistics and probability), and philosophy (which explores our basic assumptions and
values). There is much more to study.
Third, keep practising. The only effective way to learn how to identify, analyse, evaluate and
avoid fallacies in arguments and reasons is to practise, practise and practise again. The best way
to practise is with other people, and the best people to practise with are people who disagree with
you, but sincerely want to understand you and to be understood by you. If you can find such
partners, you are lucky. Treasure them and use them.
Fourth, construct your own arguments. When you want to think about an important issue,
construct the best argument that you can on both sides of that issue. (For example, if you want to
decide whether to buy a larger car or a smaller car, spell out the reasons on both sides, such as
greater comfort in a larger car, and less environmental impact from a smaller car. And if you can
vote in an election, specify the reasons for and against each candidate, such as more focus on
issues that matter to you or less ability to get anything done.) After setting out your reasons in
discursive form, do a close analysis and a deep analysis of your own argument and evaluate its
validity and strength. If you do this honestly, you will gain a better understanding of your beliefs,
your values and yourself. Then ask a friend, colleague or opponent to analyse and evaluate your
arguments, and return the favour. This exchange will help you both understand each other better.
Fifth, use your skills – throughout your daily life, including internet chats, political debates and
other contexts where polarization and incivility run rampant. Don’t simply declare what you
believe: offer arguments. Don’t let others merely announce their positions: ask questions about

