LATEX
The ultimate in portable
typesetting: LATEX runs on
any computer and produces
timely, accurate output in
publication quality on your
desktop printer or business
typesetter.
LATEX is completely free, and has
been the tried and tested
solution for over 25 years.
LATEX is in use by leading
publishers, documentation
specialists, and technical and
academic users worldwide.
What they say about LATEX
I was getting increasingly exasperated with the limitations presented by wordprocessing programs when LATEX
came into my life and allowed me to do all those things
I previously could only dream of, from unusual symbols to complicated layout. I strongly recommend it to
anybody interested in producing a professional-looking
document!
Petra Hellmuth, Language Specialist

Sophisticated professional typesetting
for business and academic publishing
The ideal solution for your document formatting
and database or XML publishing requirements

I

F you need to produce a document for publication you want

robust, professional software which won’t let you down —
whether it’s an annual report, a manual for your customers,
a business plan or white paper for your investors, an article for
a journal, a book for a publisher, a newsletter for your club or
society, or a leaflet or brochure for a product, event, or venue.

k LATEX is a document preparation system for producing high-

quality output, based on Don Knuth’s revolutionary TEX
typesetting program. It’s been used by millions since its
launch in 1985, and has been continuously updated to bring
you the state of the art in accuracy and flexibility.
k More powerful than a wordprocessor or desktop publishing system, LATEX has a host of unique features which can
dramatically cut time and cost for any publishing project,
especially for long or complex documents.
k Its secret is programmability: hundreds of prewritten templates (packages) to handle almost any formatting task — or
you can define your own with the underlying style language.
You only have to define a pattern once, and all further occurrences then follow that style, giving it unrivalled consistency:
the key to professional-looking output.

I use pdfLATEX and METAFONT not only because I need
them to create my presentations, lecture notes and papers but also because it’s fun! Entering a math equation in Powerpoint is a pain in the neck: with pdfLATEX
and METAPOST it is a lot easier because you can
change the style of what is to be displayed. I have a
lecture class from which I generate a lecture presentation and lecture notes all from the same source: I can
add text which appears in one or both of the documents.
Marc van Dongen, Computer Scientist

LATEX is available in Ireland from
Silmaril Consultants
Bishopstown, Cork
latex@silmaril.ie
http://silmaril.ie

UCC Computer Centre
Electronic Publishing Unit
3.19 Kane Building
http://epu.ucc.ie/latex/

The Irish TEX And LATEX Interest Community (ITALIC)
has a mailing list which you can join at
http://listserv.heanet.ie/italic-l.html

If you’re convinced, or if you are not, get in touch with your
nearest supplier, or contact your local User Group (see addresses
in panel). They will be happy to discuss your requirements. You’re
also very welcome to come to any of the User Group events and
meet other users.

