I

N principio erat verbũ: 7- verbũ erat
reconstruction of Gutenberg’s
apud deũ: et de9 erat verbũ. Hoc erat Typographic
42–line bible of 1452–55, using modern
in principio apud deũ. Om̃ia p ip̃m
Fraktur and decorative initial designed in
by Yannis Haralambous.
facta sunt: 7- sine ip̃o factum eĆ niĚil. The abilityMETAFONT
to control special characters like the
insular (Tironian) ampersand (7-) and unusual
Quod factũ eĆ in ip̃o vita erat: 7- vita features
like hanging punctuation makes LTEX
critical
erat lux hominũ: et lux in tenebriŊ lu- particularly well suited forandtypesetting
teaching editions.
(Beginning of St. John’s Gospel.)
cet· 7- tenebreeãnõcomp̃henderũt.FuA

Where to get LATEX

k The TEX Users Group (TUG) distributes a free copy of the

k
k

TEX Collection DVD to all members annually, with complete
installations for all major platforms and a copy of the entire
CTAN archive.
Many local and national user groups also participate: check
with your nearest group (see TUG Web site for addresses).
You can buy a copy with business support from any of the
vendors listed below.
All the public-domain and open-source implementations are
freely available for download from CTAN (below), including
the DVD ISO image of the TEX Collection.

Technical Requirements
Operating systems

LATEX runs on all current computing platforms. The most
common implementations are:
System

Implementation

Microsoft Windows

Free: TEX Live, ProTEXt (MikTEX)
Commercial: see vendor list

Unix and GNU/Linux

Free: TEX Live

Apple Macintosh OS X

Free: MacTEX (TEX Live)
Shareware: OZTEX, CMacTEX

Android

TEX for Android in the Google Play store
TEX Live for Android at Google Code

All others

Contact the TEX Users Group

The TEX Users Group (TUG)
TUG membership is $85 a year (individual), $55 (students,
new graduates, seniors, and citizens of countries with modest economies), $100 (non-voting, eg libraries), or $500 (institutional, up to eight named memberships). See http://
www.tug.org/forms for details of ‘early-bird’ rates and other
charges. Membership includes the triannual journal TUGboat
and discounts on conference fees:
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008

TUG

EUROTEX/CONTEXT AND OTHERS

Tokyo, Japan
Boston, MA
Kerala, India
San Francisco, CA
South Bend, IN
Cork, Ireland

[tba]
Breskens, Netherlands
Bassenge, Belgium & Bachotek, Poland
Brejlov, Czech Republic
Pisa, Italy
Bohinj, Slovenia & Pisa, Italy

CTAN — the Comprehensive TEX Archive Network
CTAN is an Internet archive of all free TEX and LATEX software, packages, and documentation. There are searchable
indexes and catalogues at http://www.ctan.org, http://
www.tex.ac.uk/, and http://www.dante.de .
Online and other support
Network-based support is freely available on the comp.text
.tex Usenet newsgroup, the latexusersgroup@gmail.com
mailing list and the tex.stackexchange.com web forum.
There are many others, including the TEX FAQ, listed at
www.tug.org/interest.html .

Hardware

k LATEX will run even on old machines, but a 500MHz processor or above is recommended.

k You should have at least 512Mb of memory, more if
k
k

Software for editing and reading documents

k You need a good text editor for creating and maintaink

Vendors with business support
Andrew Trevorrow
MacKichan Software
MicroPress, Inc
PCTEX, Inc
Tom Kiffe
TrueTEX, Inc

OzTEX
Scientific Word
Visual TEX
PCTEX
CMacTEX
TrueTEX

Mac
Win
Win
Win
Mac
Win

http://www.trevorrow.com/oztex/
http://www.mackichan.com
http://www.micropress-inc.com
http://www.pctex.com
http://www.kiffe.com
http://truetex.com

you aim to do very complex work or use very long
documents.
You need about 500Mb of hard disk space depending
on the options you choose (minimal install is about
250Mb; full is about 1.2Gb).
The finer your screen and printer resolution, the better
quality you will be able to see and print. A fast inkjet
printer or a laser printer is recommended if you need
printed output.

k

ing documents: there is a selection included on the TEX
Collection DVD.
You also need a PDF reader to view your typeset output (included on the TEX Collection DVD), eg
GhostScript/GSview, Okular, Adobe Acrobat Reader, etc.
You may need a graphics editor (eg GIMP) if you want
to create or modify images (see Figures); and a vector
editor (eg InkScape) if you use diagrams.

TEX, LATEX, and METAFONT are trademarks of the American Mathematical Society. PostScript, PDF, and Acrobat are trademarks of Adobe Corporation. Macintosh and TrueType are trademarks of Apple Corporation. Windows, Word, and OpenType are trademarks of
Microsoft Corporation. Unix is a trademark of Bell Laboratories. Unicode is a trademark of Unicode, Inc. Copyright © 2001–2013 by Silmaril Consultants and distributed under the terms of the LATEX Project Public License (http://www.latex-project.org/lppl/).

