56

Ethics: The Big Three Theories

having an integrated, unified moral character. Having some virtues and
some vices might lead to worse consequences than not having those virtues
at all.
2.76
Unfortunately, if having virtues and vices is to be evaluated in terms
of the behavioral consequences they lead to, then virtue ethics seems to
devolve into just a cumbersome utilitarianism. When is loyalty good? When
it leads to good consequences. When is remaining loyal bad? When it leads
to bad consequences. Or you might see it as a form of Kantianism. Having
a virtue is a good thing if it leads to respecting the categorical imperative,
but a bad thing if it leads to rights violations. No trait of character is virtuous in itself—you always need to look at consequences to tell. But if the
very same trait can be either virtuous or vicious, then it does not look like
virtue ethics is bringing anything new to the table.
2.77
If virtue theory is to remain a distinctively different moral theory, it
needs to prevent assimilation into either utilitarianism or Kantianism,
while at the same time explaining how it is possible that having some good
character traits might lead to a worse life or worse results for others than
lacking those qualities.
2.78

Objection 2: Clashing virtuesâ•… Virtue ethics advises that the good life consists in cultivating all the virtues. It is a good thing to be honest, but it is
even better if you are a kind person too. The present objection is that some
virtues apparently conflict with each other. For example, suppose that your
girlfriend is showing off her new hairstyle. She asks, “How do you like my
new haircut?” In truth, it’s awful. You say,
1. Babe, that looks great!
2. Whoa! Did you use a weed whacker on that?
Option (1) is a much kinder and considerate response. But (2) is more
honest. Which wins out, kindness or honesty? Here’s another example.
Imagine that your favorite indie band is now donating all of their profits
to charity. That’s pretty virtuous, right? Since they want to give as much to
charity as possible, the band starts writing radio-friendly pop drivel and
commercial jingles which earn a lot of money. In other words, the band
just sells out.13 Should you be disappointed? Selling out is surely a vice of
rock bands. On the other hand they are giving piles of money to save baby
seals. One more example: workaholism is a vice of excess, as discussed
earlier. Suppose, though, that you’re a workaholic to support your large and

