in box E of Figure 8.7. As abstracta, such universals could not themselves be said to have a spatiotemporal location even though they might
be generically dependent only on real particulars. This suggests a way of
resolving the long-standing problem about the "location" of universals in
space-time, for naturalism may be reconciled with the view that universals have no single or multiple location provided that the naturalist accepts
not only spatiotemporal entities but also those things dependent (only) on
them. 24
By the same token, Armstrong s impure types — types "logically tied to
a certain particular" such as being the wife of Henry VIII— would belong in
box C, as entities rigidly dependent on (but not rigidly historically dependent on) a particular real entity.25 As with other universals, on an in rebus
view these might be said to exist just in case, for example, something, at
some time, instantiates the property of being the wife of Henry VIII. Such
universals are merely dependent (not historically dependent or constantly
dependent), but this dependence is rigid dependence on a particular individual, namely Henry VIII, existing at some time or other.
In addition to showing up the space of possibilities lying between traditional category bifurcations, this system of categories also makes evident
the variety of combinations that are possible across the two axes of classification. In principle, at least, it seems possible for there to be all manner
of combinations; thus, for example, there may be concrete entities that
depend on mental states (e.g., the White House, the Mona Lisa, this dollar
bill) or concrete entities independent of the mental (e.g., rocks, molecules,
stars). By the same token, there may be abstract entities dependent on the
mental (e.g., computer programs, symphonies, laws) as well as abstracta
independent of the mental (e.g., universals of mass or length, numbers in
a Platonist view). By working from a multidimensional system of categories we are able to draw out the full space of possibilities that seem to
be needed to accommodate a great variety of entities. Whether or not
one ultimately accepts that these categories are filled, the categories at
least provide the space to argue the question sensibly and to see what is
at stake in postulating entities that fall between the cracks of traditional
category systems.
A TOOL FOR ONTOLOGY
The multidimensional system of categories outlined should help avoid
the sources of skepticism about categories and thereby clear the way for
bringing categories back as a multifaceted tool for ontology. The category

134

