https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009109987 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Truthmaking

33

The overall merits of Lewis’s view are remarkable, and the criticisms that
have been brought against it are familiar. My focus concerns its merits and ﬂaws
speciﬁcally as a theory of modal truthmakers. When it comes to this issue,
Lewis’s view is far from appealing. Perhaps it is ultimately worth its many
theoretical costs on other grounds, but not solely on the basis of its utility for the
theory of ontological grounds.
The most salient concern with the view is its extreme ontological price tag. In
order to account for the modal truths of the actual world, inﬁnitely more worlds
are brought into the fold. Lewis is quick to note that while his possible worlds
involve inﬁnitely many new ontological commitments, at least they only
involve more of the same. Lewis isn’t positing new kinds of entities, just more
of the same sorts of entities we ﬁnd in the actual world. Nevertheless, Lewis’s
view is still chock-full of ontological commitments, and there is no doubt that
accepting it comes with a great loss of parsimony. As Armstrong (2004: 83) puts
the point, Lewis is “bringing in giants to do a boy’s work.”
A second objection is epistemological in nature. On Lewis’s view, the truthmakers for statements of possibility turn out to be, at least in some cases, the
concrete entities of other possible worlds. But these are entities with which, ex
hypothesi, we have no causal interaction. Supposing that knowledge of truths
typically involves some sort of relation to what makes those truths true, one
wonders how we can have any modal knowledge at all.50 It’s true that On the
Plurality of Worlds could have been submitted on time only if Lewis’s counterpart does submit it on time. What epistemic access do we have to such an event
taking place? I seem to have no better evidence as to what’s going on in some
other possible world than I do as to what’s going on at some distant planet.
Hence, if I don’t have justiﬁcation for asserting that in some distant galaxy
there’s a philosopher who looks a lot like David Lewis and is punctually turning
in a manuscript that looks a lot like On the Plurality of Worlds (and I don’t), then
I don’t have justiﬁcation for asserting that in some other possible world there’s
a philosopher who looks a lot like David Lewis and is punctually turning in
a manuscript that looks a lot like On the Plurality of Worlds. Modal realism
leads to modal skepticism.
Lewis (1986: 108–115) brings up this style of objection himself and deals
with it at length. One of his strategies is to stage a “partners in crime” defense
with mathematical truth. Mathematics, too, is a ﬁeld in which we seem to have
knowledge in spite of having no causal access to the things that that knowledge
concerns, that is, numbers. The strength of this response turns on the strength of
50

For more on the relationship between truthmaking and epistemology, see, for example, Sorensen
2001: chapter 11 and Heathcote 2006.

