If structured propositions are so fine-grained and have already so much structure, while not presupposing that the property or relation in the second element
of the tuple is instantiated by the object(s) in the first element of the tuple, why
not simply identify states with structured propositions? This seems to be the
way Jago (2017) considers states to be ersatz states-of-affairs as well, so it has
seemed like an especially attractive view25 .
The main reason is a repetition of some points against the view of rigid
embodiments as states. Namely, suppose that xxby, B y is the truthmaker for
“My bag is brown”. Is it also the falsitymaker for “My bag is yellow”? Then
it contains irrelevant information (violating Desideratum 3). Suppose instead
that we accept negative properties like Y for not being yellow. Then could
xxby, Y y be the falsitymaker for “My bag is yellow”? Here we seem to have
the same case as above: it seems that it’s because it’s false that my bag is
yellow that we can truthfully say that it has the property of not being yellow,
rather than the other way around (violating Desideratum 4). Having said this,
if we consider the structured propositions/lagadonian language sentences to be
themselves states-of-affairs, or if we replace them by states of affairs, my view
can attribute states-of-affairs a very special role, albeit not going quite as far as
identifying them with the states.
Following to some extent Berto and Jago (2019), we might take an exact
verifier for “My bag is brown” to be a state s which will be a pair of sets, s 
xs , s y, the first, s containing the structured propositions that contain what is
responsible for the state making true what it does, and the second, s containing
the structured propositions that make the state responsible for making false
what it does. One might then take exact verification to simply be a matter of
the abstract constructions I have been alluding to belonging or not to one of
the elements of a state. For readability purposes, let us suppose that what I
am calling abstract constructions are the structured propositions of Salmon and
Soames, though I would be happy for them to be states-of-affairs constructed
in some other way (Jago (2018, §4) presents three viable alternative ways).
Let us use capital letters from the beginning of the alphabet with asterisks to
refer to them, so A for instance is the abstract construction (the structured
proposition) corresponding to the sentence A. As mentioned previously, states
will be pairs of sets, each containing these so-called abstractions.
In this way of constructing them, states have therefore a similar structure
to the double worlds of relevant logics, which have also been used by Jago
(2014) in the context of impossible worlds semantics. States constructed in
this way inherit the benefit of being able to represent independently what a
valuation point makes true and makes false. This is important for an adequate
representation of truthmaker semantics, for it follows the American Plan for
negation (Berto and Restall, 2019) and truthmaking and falsitymaking clauses
are given independently. Consider for instance a state s that both verifies and
have to be lagadonian, even though Lewis ultimately rejects linguistic ersatzism wholesale.
Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for bringing up the option that states could have mere
representations of individuals as their constituents.
25 Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for drawing my attention to this alternative.

16

