https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009109987 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Truthmaking

47

First, consider the contextual nature of Haslanger’s account. People don’t have
races simpliciter. They have races relative to contexts. Having a race is belonging to a group racialized in a particular way, and groups can be racialized (or
not) in different ways at different times in different parts of the world. There are
multiple social hierarchies in the world, and they confer oppression and privilege in different ways, and onto different divisions of people. Thus people can
have multiple races. Is that correct?
Consider an example. Take a person, Alpha, who is racialized in a particular
way in a particular sociopolitical context, C1, alongside Beta and Gamma.
These three form a racialized group G1, and as a result all belong to the race
R1 relative to C1. Now suppose that in a different sociopolitical context, C2,
these three are not racialized in the same way. Perhaps in C1 all three are ethnic
minorities, but in C2 Gamma is not an ethnic minority. Consequently, there is no
racialized group in C2 that includes Alpha, Beta, and Gamma, and so these three
do not share the same race in C2, though they do in C1.
As a result, Haslanger’s view entails that many, if not all, people belong to
multiple races, and that you can share your race with a person in some contexts,
but not others. Is this consequence a feature or a ﬂaw? The social constructionist
sees an advantage here. People are racialized in different ways in different
contexts, and this account captures that fact. Opponents, however, will argue
that while racialization is context-sensitive, race isn’t. Thus, being racialized
(i.e., being treated differentially on the basis of one’s perceived ancestry) is not
the same thing as belonging to a race.
A second consequence of Haslanger’s kind of view pertains to the subjunctive conditionals that it entails. Because social hierarchies are the truthmakers
for the facts about race (and, presumably, nothing else in the world is), their
disappearance would entail the disappearance of race. Hence, if all race-based
social hierarchies were razed, then no one would belong to any race. “Racial
equality,” then, is a contradiction in terms for sociopolitical social
constructionists.72 The existence of race implies the existence of inequality,
so those who ﬁght against racial inequality are, at the same time, ﬁghting against
the very existence of race.
Again we can ask: Is this an acceptable consequence of Haslanger’s view?
She believes that it is. One point that Haslanger stresses is that her view has
a normative dimension. Although she recognizes that she is “asking us to use an
old term in a new way,” she stresses that her goal is to ask “us to understand
ourselves and those around us as deeply molded by injustice and to draw the
appropriate prescriptive inference” (Haslanger 2000: 48). By beginning to think
72

See Glasgow 2009: 120, 2019: 131–134 and Jeffers 2013: 421.

