T. Kaspers

have already been shown to be unsolvable. This conception of reality either shrinks
the world down to a size small enough for it to be consumed wholly by the human
intellect, or it blows up this intellect to astronomical proportions just to ensure that
no stone will be left unturned. I think neither of these moves is particularly helpful
to our practices.
We could also opt for the exact opposite of this picture. We could think of the
attribution of an alethic fault to disagreements not as a commitment to a yet-to-bediscovered procedural fault but as an act of intellectual humility, an expression of
the conviction that no matter how much we know there will always be much more
we can never know. Given this ignorance, your guess is as good as mine, so to speak,
and holding on to our own beliefs in the face of disagreement with our peers is mere
stubbornness, a sin of intellectual immodesty.
Both strategies express the conviction that disagreements imply an alethic fault.
Yet, the Peircean strategy takes disagreement as a sign that we haven’t yet reached
the end of inquiry and that we must dig deeper, whereas this strategy takes disagreement as a sign that the correct answer might be out of reach altogether. I think that
it has fewer drawbacks. On a theoretical level, it avoids the controversial move of
denying the existence of lost facts, while on the practical level, it safeguards against
unproductive inquiries into intractable issues.
For both strategies, what it is for a belief to be true is for it to correspond to reality in some sense. For the Peircean strategy, it is the concept of reality that does the
heavy lifting, whereas for my preferred strategy, it is correspondence itself, interpreted as an evidence-transcendent standard, that tells us that at most one of us can
be right and that thereby adds the alethic fault needed for truth to be used as a coordination device.
I understand that pragmatists might instinctively resist an evidence-transcendent
standard at all costs because they have been told time and again that such a standard
has no bearing on our practices. However, I have now shown that it does have such
bearings. After all, aiming for an evidence-transcendent notion of correctness does
alter our practice; doing so adds friction to our disagreements, and it thereby makes
us more inclined to coordinate our opinions.

8 A Pragmatist Interpretation of Correspondence
There have been others who draw the connection between the attribution of an a
priori alethic fault to disagreement and a realist attitude toward truth. For instance,
Matthew Shields argues that a commitment to an evidence-transcendent notion of
truth follows directly from Price’s description of the truth norm. Shields believes
that the alethic fault in disagreement is reflected in the “assumption that there is
something that outstrips any inquirer’s language or thought to which inquirers are all
accountable” (Shields, 2022, 18).
However, I think Price would argue for the inverse of this explanatory relation:
this intuition that the correctness of our assertions depends on how things stand
independently of us is explained by the practice of taking disagreements to contain
an alethic fault. Our aim to coordinate our beliefs is not explained by our supposed

13

