Julian Dodd

The Aristotelian Society

Virtual Issue No. 1

!

In other words, there is no single norm governing belief, but a series of
epistemic obligations, each specific to its subject matter: a distinct such
obligation for each distinct proposition that can take the place of ‘p’ in a
true proposition of the form: <S ought to (believe that p) if and only if
p>.

5. Heal’s position is clear. Belief, as such, is not governed by a norm of
truth. It remains to be seen, though, what Heal’s grounds are for denying
(1*): the universally quantified statement ascribing a general norm for
belief. Is it not the case that belief in general aims at truth? Not
according to Heal, and here is her reasoning. The idea that truth in
general – that is, truth in itself – is a value of the kind specified by (1*)
‘has the implication that any instance of truth is, merely in virtue of
being true, worth having’ (Heal 1987/8: 105). But as Heal points out,
this result is extremely implausible, since it amounts to the thesis that we
ought to believe even utterly trivial or uninteresting truths. There are, she
observes, innumerable cases of ‘worthless potential knowledge’ (Heal
1987/8: 105).
I think Heal is right to deny that every truth is worth knowing; and,
pace Michael Lynch (2004: 186-7), I doubt whether the counterintuitiveness attaching to the claim that we ought to believe every truth
can be dissolved by adding a ‘prima facie’ clause to it. I surely do not
have even a prima facie epistemic obligation to believe the multitude of
trivial, mundane and uninteresting true propositions that come my way
as I go about my daily business (David 2005: 297-8). As I idly read my
morning newspaper, I cannot help but notice that the page has a small
tear on its left-hand edge. Was there really a pro tanto obligation on me
to believe this? A positive answer to this question looks a little farfetched.
But in fact, Heal does not do justice to the full degree of the
implausibility – one might say the absurdity (Engel 2002: 128) –
attaching to the idea that we should believe every truth. For there are
two convincing reasons for thinking that it is metaphysically impossible
to believe everything that is true. First, there are infinitely many
propositions. Second, given that any conjunction of atomic truths is itself
a truth, there will be certain truths that are too complex for us to believe
(Bykvist and Hattiangadi 2007: 279). Since ‘ought’ implies ‘can’, I
cannot be obliged – even prima facie obliged – to believe every truth.
Heal is thus most certainly right to say that we are under no
epistemic obligation to believe every truth. My worry, however, is that
!

141

