Truthmaking

7

To say that necessitation is not enough for truthmaking is not to say what is.
Thus, the notion of explanation is frequently invoked to bridge the gap between
necessitation and truthmaking. Koko doesn’t explain why “Either there are
pangolins or there aren’t any pangolins” is true, but she does explain the truth
of “Koko exists.” Similarly, my existence doesn’t account for why “My parents
exist” is true, though it perfectly accounts for why “I exist” is true. The notion of
aboutness is often appealed to here (e.g., Merricks 2007 and Schipper 2020).
“My parents exist” isn’t about me, so I can serve no role in explaining its truth.
“I exist,” by contrast, is, so I am a suitable truthmaker for it. Though the notions
of aboutness and explanation are philosophically fraught, and are themselves
the subject of enormous theoretical controversy, they both appear to be hyperintensional notions. (For example, the sentences “Triangles have three sides”
and “2 is prime” are necessarily equivalent in that it’s impossible for one of
them to be true and the other false, yet they are about different things.) If they
are part of the truthmaking relation, they can be used to explain why necessitation is not sufﬁcient for truthmaking.6
Putting together necessitation and explanation, we arrive at a dominant
perspective in truthmaker theory:
For any object φ and sentence S, φ is a truthmaker for S if and only if it’s necessary that if

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009109987 Published online by Cambridge University Press

φ exists, S is true, and the truth of S is explained by φ.

This account can be used to maintain that Koko is a truthmaker for “There are
gorillas” but not “There are sharks” or “2 + 2 = 4.”
Another reason to include a hyperintensional dimension to truthmaking is to
account for that basic slogan of truthmaker theory: truth depends on being, but
not vice versa. Sometimes necessitation runs in both directions. The existence
of Koko guarantees that “Koko exists” is true, and the truth of “Koko exists”
guarantees the existence of Koko. If the truthmaking relation itself is to account
for the asymmetry between truth and being, then necessitation alone is inadequate. Explanation, however, is an asymmetric relation. If α explains β, then β
doesn’t explain α. So an explanatory account of the truthmaking relation is
better positioned for capturing the dependency between truth and being.
The main impetus for believing that there is a hyperintensional dimension to
the truthmaking relation is dealing with the counterexamples considered above,
and accounting for how truth depends on being. The main challenge for such
accounts is spelling out the relevant notion of explanation (or any other hyperintensional notion deployed). For instance, Jonathan Tallant (2018) wields the
6

A related hyperintensional notion is grounding, which has also been employed to show what
separates truthmaking from necessitation (e.g., Schaffer 2008 and Jago 2018).

