The Practical Bearings of Truth as Correspondence﻿	

aim to correspond to reality. Rather, it is because we aim to coordinate our beliefs
that we get this sense that our beliefs must respond to a standard that is external to
us.
I agree with this thought. It is not enough to merely appeal to some metaphysical story to explain why we take disagreements to imply alethic faults. If anything,
it is our practice of taking disagreements to imply these faults that gives rise to this
metaphysical story. Yet, what I have appealed to in this article is not a metaphysical story but a practical difference, namely the difference between personal and
shared inquiry. It is this difference that, I have argued, makes deflationism an untenable view. If the truth norm is to work as a coordination device for shared but not
personal inquiry, there must be something to this norm that is not conveyed by the
assertion norm. As it turns out, the truth norm consists of realist substance, and this
realism must somehow be accounted for.
I have shown in the previous section that Peirce introduces his metaphysical beliefs not as an explanation of why inquiry must lead to convergence but as a
regulative assumption: in order to engage with our inquiry in the way we think we
should, we must believe that reality is such that it will guide us to a “foreordained
goal” and a “predestinate opinion” (Peirce, 1878, 300). The realism implied by the
aim for truth could be interpreted in the same fashion: to engage with our inquiry
in the way we think we should, we must assume that we aim for our beliefs to correspond to reality.
It might almost sound like correspondence has become nothing more than a useful fiction: for us to carry out inquiry in the way we think we ought to, we should
just pretend that our assertions aim to correspond to reality. However, pragmatists
cannot actually endorse this kind of response when it comes to truth; their commitment to pragmatism bars them from doing so. Let me briefly explain why.
There are two reasons for calling a belief a useful fiction: (1) it is useful to act
on the belief, but it is actually nonsense, or (2) it is useful to act on the belief even
though it is actually false. Pragmatists would want to go for the first option by arguing that the correspondence theory is “empty metaphysics”. Their argument for this
view is that aiming for correspondence, as opposed to justification or an epistemic
notion of truth — i.e., having an external instead of an internal standard — has no
bearing on our practices. However, this article has shown why this argument fails
and why the aim for correspondence is practically significant. Therefore, the pragmatist argument to the effect that the correspondence conception of truth is nonsensical or empty does not work.
The only option left is to say that, though it would be useful to pretend that truth
is correspondence, this is not actually the case. Yet, as I’ve shown in a previous
paper (2022, 10), this response would be self-undermining. The idea that truth is
correspondence helps us to properly conduct our shared inquiry. This idea is practically beneficial. In what way would it be false, then? In order to insist that it is false,
we would have to rely on a notion of truth that goes beyond our practices, that goes
beyond our internal standards. This means that we would end up presupposing what
we are trying to reject: an external standard of correctness.
Therefore, pragmatists cannot treat correspondence as a useful fiction, and nor
should they. As long as they interpret the aim for correspondence as the practical

13

