Synthese (2023) 202:130

Page 17 of 24

130

two truth properties: a normative one and a nonnormative property. In this respect,
my kind of pluralism would be very similar to the “ecumenical alethic pluralism” of
Ferrari and Moruzzi (2019). Ferrari and Moruzzi use their proposal of a subjectivist
and relativist metaphysics and epistemology for the domain of taste, as mentioned
above, to argue that the normativity of truth is locally deflated, and that there must
thus be a normatively deflated truth property in addition to one or more normative
truth properties. Yet their concern isn’t with practical considerations about how truth
is best used but with, for instance, metaphysical considerations about the status of
discourse on taste. This marks a difference in their approach to pluralism as well.
Their pluralism follows the classical model: the concept of truth is characterized by a
network of platitudes and truth is plural only at the metaphysical level. My pluralism
operates primarily at the level of use. The question is whether the plurality at this
practical level carries over to the conceptual and metaphysical level.
6.1 Function and use
I shall first discuss the conceptual level. As mentioned earlier on, the network analysis
of Wright (1992) and Lynch (2009) specifies the function of truth in terms of platitudes
that relate the concept of truth to that of, for instance, justification, belief, and inquiry.
I also mentioned that among these platitudes are those that express the normativity of
truth, such as the platitude that truth is the goal of inquiry. Ferrari and Moruzzi cannot
maintain that a truth property must satisfy all these platitudes, for their nonnormative
truth property couldn’t satisfy these platitudes that express truth’s normativity. They
suggest that the network analysis imposes a flexible instead of a strict requirement on
truth properties, meaning that a property need not satisfy every single one of the core
platitudes for it to count as truth (Ferrari & Morruzi 2019, p. 387). This is their way
of maintaining the conceptual unity of truth.
This might be more difficult for me to do given my meta-alethic pragmatism and
the fact that truth has multiple uses. Does this not mean that truth has multiple functions—that there is no such thing as the function of truth—and that, thus, truth must
be plural at the conceptual level as well? I do not think that it does. Let me explain
why.
As Amy Thomasson notes, there is a difference between an entity’s function and
the way in which it is used (Thomasson, 2020, p. 53). This distinction is subtle. For
instance, a hammer can serve many purposes, such as cracking nuts, but its function is
to drive nails. I don’t think there is a principled distinction between functions and uses
that holds for all kinds of entities. However, there is, I believe, an intuitive difference
in the case of truth. The deflationist argues that truth is primarily a linguistic device,
and that it has a linguistic function. Remember Strawson’s (1949) claim that truth is
a linguistic device for the expression of agreement. As I have shown, Shapiro (2021)
takes this conception on board but asks why we only use this device for assertions. He
argues that a device for the expression of agreement can be used to transfer justificatory
burdens. Thus, truth is a tool that functions as a means of expressing agreement, but
this tool can be used to transfer justificatory burdens.

123

