130

Page 12 of 24

Synthese (2023) 202:130

he argues that it might still be derived from the normativity of our assertoric practices
more generally, as seen as including all of these norms. He says that “Any discourse
controlled by such a complex pattern of norms will, once “true” is introduced via
the [equivalence schema], throw up the contrasts between “true” and “assertible”
that drive the Inflationary Argument” (Wright, 2021, p. 447). There is a myriad of
norms that guide our assertoric discourse, and the deflationist might still maintain
that the normativity of truth is derived from these norms, instead of it being a further
distinguishable assertoric norm.
Wright goes on to also argue that truth isn’t normative in the case of taste. Instead of
talking about the metaphysics and epistemology of the domain of taste, Wright talks
about the phenomenon of faultless disagreement to support his claim.
The puzzle of faultless disagreement is as follows. When we disagree, we take the
other’s belief to be false. Hence, we take the other’s belief to be worse than ours; ours
is true, whereas theirs is false. So how could any disagreement be faultless?
The contextualist would say that our assertions of taste are implicitly indexicalized.
What I mean by saying that pistachio ice cream is tasty is that it is tasty for me. What
you mean when you say that it isn’t is that it isn’t tasty for you. That’s why both our
assertions can be true at once and why the disagreement is faultless. However, as John
MacFarlane argues, if this is the case then we aren’t really disagreeing at all, we are
simply talking past each other (MacFarlane, 2014, p. 8).
A relativist like Kölbel (2004) or MacFarlane (2014) would say that the truth of a
claim like ‘Pistachio ice cream is tasty’ is relative to whomever assesses the claim.
Hence, one and the same proposition could be true when assessed by you and false
when assessed by me, which is how we could come to disagree without either of us
being alethically at fault.
Yet, Wright argues that instead of fracturing the truth norm in this way, so that
everyone has their own standard, it would be simpler to do away with the normativity
of truth entirely for matters of taste:
[Faultless disagreement is] a hopeless idea if the discourse is thought of as
answerable to a single norm of truth with which no statement and its negation
can simultaneously comply. So if faultless disagreement is to be a possibility,
there must be no such single alethic norm. That leaves two options. One is, in one
way or another, to — as it were — fracture the norm, multiply the ways of being
true, and spread the pieces around, so that conflicting opinions can each alight
on a shard. [Relativism] attempts a particular implementation of that option. The
other option is to suction out the substance of the alethic norm, leaving only the
formal shell. (Wright, 2021, p. 445)
If truth doesn’t pack its “normal normative punch” (Wright, 2021, p. 438), then we
can disagree with someone, thereby taking their belief to be false, without automatically taking them to be at fault for having this belief.
Both Ferrari and Moruzzi as well as Wright have hereby shown that it is conceivable,
if not plausible, that truth isn’t normative for matters of taste. Hence, it is still possible
that Price was right about his pragmatic vindication of the truth norm; maybe the
practical advantages of aiming for truth do explain why truth is normative. However,

123

