Firstly, the charge that modal claims would not concern the entities which
they are about. As Kripke (1980) puts it, it seems I have no reason to (at least
prudentially) care about what happens to individuals in other spatiotemporally
isolated worlds, whereas modal claims about oneself are usually prudentially
relevant. Why should Humphrey care that some counterpart of his won the
election but not him?
Another objection, put forth by Adams (1974) is that modal realism implies
that no matter what one does when faced with a choice, all options will be done
by counterparts of one. So it’s indifferent what one does. But it seems one
might be rightly chastised for, say, not wearing a seat belt during a car trip. Of
course, one would not be excused if by chance nothing bad happens as a result
of one’s actions. And the reason for that seems to be that easily things could
have gone differently and taken a wrong turn. However, if we analyse this claim
in terms familiar to the modal realist, going back to Kripke’s (1980) objection
then it’s not clear why the person in the actual world should be blamed for what
happens to wholly distinct individuals in other possible worlds. What we seem
to want to claim is that easily some negative consequences could have followed
from the actual person’s actions to them.
A further worry for this account is that states in standard truthmaker semantics need not be possible. Therefore, accepting impossible states and that
states simply are concrete objects would lead one to accept impossible concrete
objects. Significantly, such concrete objects would not merely represent impossibilities, in the same way that a fiction book might narrate an impossible story,
but rather they realize the impossibility themselves. But then one accepts that
impossibilities are realized by some objects, which would seem to commit one’s
theory to impossibilities when quantifying unrestrictedly over what there is13 .
To resist this last worry one could instead, following Berto (2010), opt for
hybrid modal realism and a disjunctive account of what states are, according
to which: (i) possible states are concrete; and (ii) impossible states are abstract
representations constructed out of possibilia. This account notably rejects the
parity thesis (Berto and Jago, 2019), namely that impossible and possible states
are ontologically on a par, and are entities of the same kind. Aside from inheriting the usual difficulties faced by modal realism, one might worry that this
account does not say enough on why we should distinguish between what the
possible and impossible states are like. It is clear that the impossible states
can’t be genuine (i.e. concrete and such that they represent, say, that a is F by
containing a as a part, in such a way that, in the state, a does indeed satisfy
F ). Yet if they are not concrete but rather abstract, why not say that all states
are abstract? One reason that one could present (Berto, 2010) is that we should
strive for a reductive account of modality, as Lewis (1986) has argued for. But
it isn’t clear that: (i) such a reduction is desirable in the first place (Stalnaker,
2012); and (ii) if it is, that it isn’t achievable without an ontology like that of
the modal realist (Berto and Jago, 2019).
13 See Lewis (1986) for the original objection. Yagisawa (2010) endorses concrete impossibilia, however Jago (2014) and Berto and Jago (2019) have successfully argued against this
form of extended modal realism.

8

