30

Part I: The Positive View

meaning. The ‘limiting case’ idea may be a neat picture, but we do not
yet have a reason to believe that the picture is true to life.¹
This ﬁrst point should be conceded to Quine. The ‘limiting case’
idea is pretty, but I cannot think what it would be for one sentence to
be ‘more’ true in virtue of meaning (or the world) than another. There
is no argument for the existence of analytic sentences to be had here.
Quine’s second challenge is this: not only does the conclusion (that
some sentences are true solely in virtue of meaning) not follow from the
premises, but it looks as if it is not even true. The standard examples
which get presented as sentences that are true in virtue of meaning are
not really examples of sentences that are true in virtue of meaning. Take
the case of everything is self-identical. If we look at the world, we will
note that all the things in it really are self identical. It seems that the
world makes even this sentence true.
This second point is troubling and deserves a substantial answer.
How can an analytic sentence be true in virtue of meaning (except
in the trivial way that all sentences are) if even the best examples of
analytic sentences seem to be true in part because the world is a certain
way?

Boghossian’s Version of the Argument
Boghossian rejects truth in virtue of meaning on similar grounds,
writing:
I want to register my wholehearted agreement with Quine, that the metaphysical
notion [of analyticity] is of dubious explanatory value, and possibly of dubious
coherence.

Boghossian sets the objection up as a dilemma. He claims, very reasonably, that it is a truism that for any statement S,
(1.1) S is true iff for some p, S means that p and p.∗
He then asks:
. . . how could the fact that S means that p make it the case that S is true?
Doesn’t it also have to be the case that p?
¹ This point also has some useful (and legitimate) rhetorical force for the Quinean: it
suggests where the supporter of analyticity may have gone wrong; he was understandably
bewitched by this neat but inaccurate picture of what is special about, for example,
logical sentences.
∗
I reproduce Boghossian’s text exactly here.

