144

Part II: A Defense

ﬁt into another, or two things to ﬁt together, in the case where one was specially
made to ﬁt the other; but I cannot understand what it means to say this in
any other case.’’ Perhaps we should not take Quine’s words here too seriously.
(1956: 152-3)

Boghossian tries somewhat harder to accommodate (5.3) into the
Quinean position as a whole, suggesting that the following is Quine’s
view:
Although there is such a thing as the property of synonymy; and although
it can be instantiated by pairs of tokens of the same orthographic type; and
although it can be instantiated by pairs of tokens of distinct orthographic types,
provided that they are related to each other by way of an explicit stipulation;
it is, nevertheless, in principle impossible to generate instances of this property
in some other way, via some other mechanism. For example, it is impossible
that two expressions that were introduced independently of each other into
the language, should have been introduced with exactly the same meanings. (Boghossian 1997)

After attributing this unlikely-seeming view to Quine—apparently in
desperation—Boghossian argues against it.

5.1 THE TRANSIENCE OF DEFINITION
I suspect that Quine’s view of the relation between analyticity and
deﬁnition was more innovative than this. His view of the use of
deﬁnition in science was such that the kind of analyticity it could
support was not the kind that could do any of the work that his targets
wanted it to do—in particular it could not play an important role in the
epistemology of science. He admits that there is some sense of analytic
on which legislative deﬁnitions are analytic, but denies that this notion
can be what his opponents and targets mean by analytic. They need a
notion that will do more work.
The reason this notion cannot do enough work is that legislative deﬁnitions are in a certain sense ephemeral, independent of meaning and in the
ﬁrst place properties of utterances (which Quine thinks of as acts), rather
than sentence types (Quine 1965[1954]). I will refer to this collection
of Quinean theses as the doctrine of the transience of deﬁnition.
To begin with, Quine thinks that deﬁnitions are ephemeral. Though
a word may be introduced using a deﬁnition and come to be an
accepted part of the language; accepting the deﬁnition need be no

