Carnapian Explication



. Carnap’s Explicit Discussion of Explication
The ﬁrst use of the term “explication,” in Carnap’s technical sense, occurs
in his article “Two Conceptions of Probability.” A more elaborate discussion of explication, as a philosophical method, occurs in Meaning and
Necessity. There Carnap characterizes it as follows:
The task of making more exact a vague or not quite exact concept used in
everyday life or in an earlier stage of scientiﬁc or logical development, or
rather of replacing it by a newly constructed, more exact concept, belongs
among the most important tasks of logical analysis and logical construction.
We call this the task of explicating, or of giving an explication for, the
earlier concept. (M&N, –, original emphasis)

Similarly but more concisely, he writes in Logical Foundations of
Probability: “By an explication we understand the transformation of an
inexact prescientiﬁc concept, the explicandum, into an exact concept, the
explicatum” (LFP, , original emphasis). Later commentators have also
used “conceptual engineering“ for the method articulated by Carnap,
based on the fact that he talks about “language engineering” occasionally.
As its title makes clear, the two core concepts to be explicated in
Carnap’s  book are “meaning” and “necessity.” In this  book,
as well as the closely related  article, his focus is on “probability” and
“conﬁrmation,” two other targets of explication. The longer quote above
indicates that Carnap thinks of his approach in the –s not as a
radical departure from but as the development of earlier approaches,
especially “logical analysis” and “logical construction” (Russellian terminology). There is also a direct link to the method of “rational
reconstruction“ in Carnap’s earlier Der logische Aufbau der Welt ().
Among the concepts “analyzed” and “reconstructed” in his earlier works,
from the s to the early’s, are: “space” (in various senses); “completeness” (for axiom systems); and “analytic” or “logical truth” (building
on Wittgenstein’s notion of “tautology“). In the s–s, he treats



See (IA, ), also Creath (a, ). I owe this point and the references to Georg Brun.
In the preface to the second edition of Aufbau, published in , Carnap actually starts to replace
the label “logical reconstruction” explicitly by “explication,” as Georg Brun pointed out to me.
Hence, this early book can be seen as providing Carnapian explications for a wide range of
empirical concepts.

Cf. Carnap’s Der Raum, Allgemeine Axiomatik (), Logische Syntax der Sprache (LSS) and
Introduction to Semantics (IS), respectively; see Leitgeb and Carus () for precise references.


