2.6 • Growth

15

2

Rafael Bombelli (1526–1572)

The equation x3 = 15x + 4 considered above is an example of an “irreducible cubic”, one with
rational coefficients, irreducible over the rationals, all of whose three roots are real and distinct.
It was shown in the nineteenth century that any solution by radicals of such a cubic—not just
Cardano’s—must involve complex numbers [5, 10]. Thus complex numbers are unavoidable
when determining solutions by radicals of irreducible cubics. It is for this reason that they arose
in connection with the solution of cubic rather than (as seems much more plausible) quadratic
equations. Note that the nonexistence of a solution of the quadratic x2 + 1 = 0 was accepted for
centuries.
2.6

Growth

Here are several examples of the penetration of complex numbers into mathematics in the
centuries after Bombelli.
As early as 1620, Albert Girard suggested that an equation of degree n may have n roots.
Such statements of the “Fundamental Theorem of Algebra” were however vague and unclear.
For example Descartes, who coined the unfortunate term “imaginary” for the new numbers
(Gauss called them “complex”), stated that although one can imagine that every equation has
as many roots as is indicated by its degree, no (real) numbers correspond to some of these
imagined roots.
Leibniz, who spent considerable time and effort on the question of the meaning of complex
numbers and the possibility of deriving reliable results by applying the ordinary laws of algebra
to them, thought of complex roots as “an elegant and wonderful resource of divine intellect, an
unnatural birth in the realm of thought, almost an amphibium between being and non-being”
[11, p. 159].
Complex numbers were used by Johann Heinrich Lambert for map projection, by Jean le
Rond d’Alembert in hydrodynamics, and by Euler, d’Alembert, and Lagrange in (incorrect)
proofs of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
Euler made important use of complex numbers in, for example, number theory and
analysis; he also linked the exponential and trigonometric functions and, arguably, the five
most important numbers in mathematics in, respectively, the following two famous formulas:
eix = cos x + i sin x and eπi + 1 = 0 . (Euler was the first to designate −1 by “i”.) Yet he said of
them [9, p. 594]:

