How to Become a Spinozist

followed in the early Philosophical Conversation. He sought to portray
the quarrels among the various schools of philosophy as purely verbal
disputes and to prove that a “clarified” or “reformed Spinozism” [geläuterter Spinozismus] was unproblematic since it could be made compatible
with morality and religion. It was this Spinozism that Lessing must have
meant. In contrast to Jacobi, Mendelssohn thought he was able to show
that a rational refutation of Spinoza is indeed possible, and he undertook
to provide such a refutation using the same arguments that Christian
Wolff had used before him. He adopts Wolff’s (false) argument according
to which Spinoza conflated intensive with extensive infinity and conceived
God to be composed of an infinitude of finite things (cp. MGS 3,2:106). If,
however, God is to be truly self-subsistent and independent, then he must
be infinite in respect to his power and not with respect to his extension.
Furthermore, Mendelssohn also follows Wolff in claiming that Spinoza’s definition of the term “substance” is arbitrary. He does concede that
there is a kind of substantiality proper only to a being whose existence is
necessary and independent of any other thing. No finite being, but only
God possesses substantiality or self-sufficiency in this sense. From selfsufficiency, however, he distinguishes what he calls “separate existence,”
which though dependent, can nevertheless be an entity separate from the
self-sufficient being. If Spinoza refuses to call beings such as these substances, then according to Mendelssohn the dispute is merely verbal and
far from constituting proof of their impossibility: “Instead of proving that
all the things that exist separately are really only one thing, in the end all
he shows is that there is only one self-sufficient being. Instead of demonstrating that the totality of the finite constitutes a single self-sufficient
substance, he ends up maintaining that this totality must depend upon a
single infinite substance. But all this can be conceded without settling the
dispute. The real point of contention remains where it was at the start.
His proofs are valid, but they fail to refute us” (MGS 3,2:107). By the
same token, however, it might be pointed out that Mendelssohn himself
has not proven (but here rather merely assumes) that there really are beings for themselves.
Finally, he offers a third argument to the effect that Spinoza’s theory of
substance with extension and thought as its attributes can only explain the
material aspect of bodies and thoughts, but not their ‘form’: “Whence does
the body receive its motion, an organic body its form, i.e. its purposive
and regular movement, and every other body its figure? Where is its origin to be found?” (MGS 3,2:108). Motion cannot originate in the whole,
85

