The “Critical Enterprise”: Complete?

thus prove to be “related” to it, nevertheless “let one think more than one
can express in a concept determined by words” (5:315).
We can now say more precisely what it is that Kant means by the ‘free
play’ of the cognitive faculties. It denotes an essential inexhaustibility of
the aesthetic object in the sense that it allows for an indeterminate number of interpretations, no single one of which is definitive or conclusive.
The scope of possible interpretations is unlimited and varies over time;
new concepts may stimulate the imagination to produce new and unforeseen representations, while the new and unforeseen representations of the
imagination may in turn give rise to corresponding combinations of concepts that no one had thought of before. We experience this mutual stimulation of the cognitive faculties as arousing and invigorating, and we express
this feeling by saying that the object is beautiful.
Such, then, is Kant’s analysis of judgments of taste. Like analysis in
general, it answers the question quid facti, but does not tell us quid iuris.
It fails to explain why one “may at the same time demand that everyone
should consent to it” (5:278) and why this consent “is expected of everyone as if it were a duty” (5:296). Up to this point the investigation is comparable to Kant’s manner of proceeding in the Prolegomena or in the first
two chapters of the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals which also
proceed analytically and are therefore in need of completion by a synthetic
procedure for deducing the legitimacy of the underlying principle.3
That I may expect everyone’s consent ‘as if it were a duty’ can, Kant
believes, be explained on the assumption “that the mere universal communicability of his feeling must in itself already involve an interest for
us” (5:296). Thus for example the pleasure we take in the good is always
bound up with an interest, for it is an object of the pure will. And to will
something and to take an interest in its existence are for Kant synonymous. It is for this reason that we as moral beings have an interest in the
consequences of our deeds, for the ultimate purpose of our moral actions is precisely to bring the highest good into worldly existence. However, since we can only postulate the objective reality of the concept of
3

“Thus the empirical exposition of aesthetic judgments may always make a start
at furnishing the material for a higher investigation, yet a transcendental discussion of this faculty is still possible and essential for the critique of taste. For unless
this has a priori principles, it could not possibly guide the judgments of others and
make claims to approve or reject them with even a semblance of right” (5:278).
131

