THINKING

ABOUT

FITNESS AND NATURAL

SELECTION

67

law of addition of forces gives us a value for totalforce, and the latter
feeds into the consequence law.
By contrast, vernacular fitness is specified in comparative terms and
in restricted contexts. For example, you might learn that the optimal
reproductive strategy with respect to sex determination is to produce
male offspring when there are fewer males in the population, and
females when there are fewer females. But this only tells you about
the relative merits of strategies within a circumscribed set, with other
factors held constant. The analysis does not tell you whether producing offspring of the minority sex is more or less advantageous than
other fitness-relevant things you can do; there is, generally, no way of
combining the effects of a good strategy in this game, with good or
bad strategies in other games. For example, we have no way of
calculating whether a given sex-selection strategy interacts with a
given parental-care strategy, and how the fitness produced by variants
of these strategies combine. This inability to add the "forces" of
fitness is even more pronounced when the source laws are in unrelated domains. Suppose a certain species undertakes parental care, is
resistant to malaria, and is somewhat weak but very quick. How do
these fitness factors add up? We have no idea at all. The theory of
probability has no general way to deal with such questions.15
Since we cannot add up the values produced by the source laws, the
quantification of fitness in the laws of population genetics is conceptually independent of their occurrence in source laws in a way not paralleled in the Newtonian treatment of force. The overall fitness values
demanded by consequence lawsmust be estimated statistically,that is, by
looking at actual values for number of offspring, and using these actual
values to estimate expected values and other statisticalquantities. This
independence has been remarked on by more than one philosopher of
biology. "Fitnessmust be measured by its effects,"saysAlexander Rosenberg.16 But the independence of consequence laws has often been
misdiagnosed. Rosenberg thinks that it arises because there are multiple
physical realizations of fitness. Sober takes a related line: "The supervenience of fitness-the fact that fitness is not a single physical property15
Donald Davidson makes structurally the same point in "How Is the Weakness of
the Will Possible?" in Joel Feinberg, ed., Moral Concepts(New York: Oxford, 1971),
pp. 93-113. He argues (pp. 108-11) that there is no systematic way of comparing the
negative value of brushing one's teeth given that one is sleepy with the positive value
of doing so given that one values healthy teeth. And it follows that there is no
systematic way of constructing the "all things considered"judgment on whether one
should brush one's teeth.
16
"Fitness," this JOURNAL, LXXX, 8 (August 1983): 457-73, at p. 459.

