78

THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

might ascend to a more inclusive type that includes, for instance, all
forms of inheritance (possible and actual). In this more inclusive
selection type, the growth rates are averaged out over all forms of
inheritance. There is no selection in this or any other type in the
absence of some sort of continuity that could be considered a fill-in
for inheritance.
In this way of looking at things, the distinction between evolution
(the total change of gene frequencies due to all causes), and natural
selection (the portion of evolution due to differences in competitive
advantage) is unmotivated. Natural selection is, as Li's theorem tells
us, the aggregative result over time of differential growth rates in a
population. These growth rates are explained by considering all of
the factors posited by the most specific relevant natural-selection
formula, competitive advantage acting in concert with all the others.
In histories that conform to this formula, certain trends get established at the e-level as accumulations of multiple concrete eventsbirths, deaths, mate choices, as well as events at the cellular and
molecular level. These trends constitute natural selection. There is
no difference between these trends and evolution. Further, since
these trends constitute total change from generation to generation,
predictive fitness is their measure, not the supposed partial value that
some posit as vernacular fitness. Like the distinction between natural
selection and evolution, the distinction between vernacular fitness
(an organism-type's overall competitive advantage traceable to heritable traits), and predictive fitness (its expected growth rate, or the
propensity underlying it), is unmotivated.
Some might resist this conclusion on the grounds that actuarial
practice regularly apportions causal responsibility to various factors.
(After all, this is what multivariate analysis is all about.) In responding
to this concern, we want clearly to acknowledge that it is legitimate to
ask, in a statistical sense, how much of the causation of B is due to
competitive advantage, though as we noted in sections IIIand iv, one
needs to be prepared for a degree of indeterminacy in the answer,
since the composition and decomposition of probabilities is mathematically undefined in many cases. This question is similar to the
questions asked when determining insurance premiums. For example: How much does being a male youth contribute to road accidents
in which male youths are involved? There is some sort of answer to
this question in statistical correlations. But this does not imply that
being a male youth operates in an ontologically separate way in these
accidents. This is clearest when we think about the individual events.
An eighteen-year-old male is involved in a collision at night, in the
rain, after drinking three pints of beer. Are these factors, specified in

