34

J A M E S WO O DWA R D

that different neural regions or circuits are involved in reasoning with these two sorts of
conditionals—a claim that might be assessed by imaging studies in the case of adults or
conceivably by lesion studies showing dissociations between the abilities to reason with
the two sorts of conditionals. If distinct neural areas or circuits are found, one might then
investigate their developmental time course and determine whether it is true that areas
associated with future hypothetical reasoning become operational in children before
areas associated with ‘counterfactual’ reasoning—this might then serve as an independent check on the conclusions about this drawn from studies of verbal behavior.

4 Counterfactuals and Causation: Background
The relationship between counterfactuals and causal claims has been a major focus of
discussion in both philosophy and psychology for decades. As a point of departure, it
will be useful to separate out a number of different more speciﬁc issues that fall under
this general heading. (I do not claim that these issues are sharply distinct—they tend to
blend into each other.)
(1) Issues having to do with providing an account of the semantics (or content or
meaning or truth conditions) of causal claims in terms of counterfactuals and/or with
whether causal claims imply (in virtue of their meaning) associated counterfactual
claims (or vice versa). The counterfactual theories of causation developed in the
philosophical literature such as Lewis (1973) and Mackie (1974) have tended to focus
on such issues. Lewis’ extremely inﬂuential account is explicitly reductive: his aim is to
provide necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for claims of the form c causes e, where c and
e are individual events (that is, so-called token causal claims—see Section 6), in terms of
counterfactuals involving c and e, where it (is claimed) these counterfactuals can be
understood in a way that does not presuppose causal notions. (In a bit more detail
Lewis deﬁnes causation in terms of causal dependence: Simplifying slightly, e causally
depends on c if and only if the following two counterfactuals are true: (i) if c were to
occur, e would occur, (ii) if c were not to occur, e would not occur. C causes e if and
only if there is a chain of events c, c1 . . . cn, e such that each member in the chain
(except c) is causally dependent on the event before it. Causation is thus the transitive
closure of causal dependence which is itself deﬁned in terms of counterfactuals.) It
should be borne in mind, however, that even if such reductive projects are unsuccessful
(and the relevant counterfactuals require causal notions for their speciﬁcation), it still
might be true that there are interesting and important interrelationships between causal
claims and counterfactuals. For example, my own ‘interventionist’ account of causation, described in more detail below, takes this view—causal claims are connected to a
special kind of counterfactual but spelling out the content of these counterfactuals
requires (other) causal information. Whether reductive or non-reductive, philosophical accounts that connect causes and counterfactuals have generally focused on what
I call below a broad notion of causation—their goal has been to use counterfactuals to
distinguish between causal and other sorts of relationships such as those involving mere

