Understanding the Demand for Illegal Drugs

98

UNDERSTANDING THE DEMAND FOR ILLEGAL DRUGS

at approximately $17 million in 2009, which is relatively expensive for
drug data indicators.
The committee recommends that the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services consider, first, whether the Drug Abuse Warning Network series should be continued given that these data have
not had much value for either policy or research, and, second, if it
is continued, whether it should be conducted by agencies that are
already collecting information from emergency departments and
medical examiners.
On the second point, for example, the Food and Drug Administration
and other agencies collect data from emergency departments for other
purposes, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention regularly
receives data from medical examiners on vital statistics. It may be more
useful to merge DAWN into those other systems, reducing the reporting
burden and taking advantage of the expertise these other agencies have in
dealing with emergency departments and medical examiners. We believe
that continuing DAWN in this way would lower its cost.
Treatment Episode Data System
Although TEDS was originally developed as an administrative dataset, as noted above it has become an increasingly valuable research tool
in understanding changing patterns of illegal drug use. The quality of
the data appears to have improved in recent years, and it provides a
large-sample dataset about the circumstances of people who enter substance abuse treatment. The publication of the TEDS-D discharge dataset,
starting in 2008, is potentially a major addition to the capacity for both
monitoring and studying drug abuse treatment.
TEDS also might be made more valuable through the inclusion of
additional data, such as individual identifiers, including specific sociodemographic identifiers, and through additional surveys conducted on a
subsample of treatment clients. Because TEDS imposes data collection
burdens on providers and clients, we are not in a position to specify these
changes in detail.
The Committee recommends that the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration give high priority to expanding
and improving the Treatment Episode Data Set.

Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

