228

THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

does not completely justify S in believing that h.7 This definition is
strong enough to rule out the example of the pyromaniac as a case
of knowledge. The statement that the striking of a match will not
cause it to ignite, which is true, is such that when it is conjoined to
any statement that completely justifies the pyromaniac in believing
that the match will ignite, the resultant conjunction will fail to so
justify him in that belief. Given this definition of defeasibility, the
analysis of nonbasic knowledge would require that a man who has
nonbasic knowledge that h must have some justification for his belief that is not defeated by any true statement.
However, this requirement is somewhat unrealistic. To see that
the definition of defeasibility under consideration makes the analysis of nonbasic knowledge excessively restrictive, we need only notice that there can be true statements that are misleading. Suppose
I see a man walk into the library and remove a book from the library by concealing it beneath his coat. Since I am sure the man is
Tom Grabit, whom I have often seen before when he attended my
classes, I report that I know that Tom Grabit has removed the
book. However, suppose further that Mrs. Grabit, the mother of
Tom, has averred that on the day in question Tom was not in the
library, indeed, was thousands of miles away, and that Tom's identical twin brother, John Grabit, was in the library. Imagine, moreover, that I am entirely ignorant of the fact that Mrs. Grabit has
said these things. The statement that she has said these things would
defeat any justification I have for believing that Tom Grabit removed the book, according to our present definition of defeasibility.
Thus, I could not be said to have nonbasic knowledge that Tom
Grabit removed the book.
The preceding might seem acceptable until we finish the story
by adding that Mrs. Grabit is a compulsive and pathological liar,
that John Grabit is a fiction of her demented mind, and that Tom
Grabit took the book as I believed. Once this is added, it should be
apparent that I did know that Tom Grabit removed the book, and,
since the knowledge must be nonbasic, I must have nonbasic knowledge of that fact. Consequently, the definition of defeasibility must
be amended. The fact that Mrs. Grabit said what she did should
not be allowed to defeat any justification I have for believing that
Tom Grabit removed the book, because I neither entertained any
beliefs concerning Mrs. Grabit nor would I have been justified in
"The Ethics of Requirement," American Philosophical Quarterly,
definition of defeasibility would make our analysis of nonbasic knowledge very similar to one Harman derives from Lehrer's
analysis and also one proposed by Marshall Swain in "The Analysis of NonBasic Knowledge" (unpublished).
7 Chisholm,

I, 2 (April 1964): 147-153. This

This content downloaded on Fri, 14 Dec 2012 08:25:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

