202

PETER MENZIES

The ﬁrst three counterexamples show that Lewis’s theory does not distinguish
between causes and enabling conditions. My hypothesis about the distinction is that
an enabling condition has to satisfy only the counterfactual condition (ii), with the
counterfactual typically construed as a deviant counterfactual, whereas a cause has to
satisfy both conditions (i) and (ii), with the counterfactual in (i) construed as a deviant
counterfactual and the counterfactual in (ii) as a default counterfactual.
Birth and Death
Recall that in this example we judge a car accident to be a cause of a person’s death,
whereas we do not judge his birth to be so. It is possible to see that the car accident, but
not the person’s birth, counts as a cause of the person’s death, according to the truth
conditions above. Since the important difference between these events concerns the
status of the type (i) counterfactuals rather than the type (ii) counterfactuals, I shall focus
on the former. To see that the type (i) counterfactual, ‘If the car accident were to occur,
the person would die’, is a true deviant counterfactual, perform the following thought
experiment: consider the actual world up until a short time before the actual car
accident, then imagine that the car accident occurs, not as a result of the actual course
of history but as a result of an intervention, and ask whether the person will die in this
new course of events as it evolves. Clearly, the answer is that the person will die. On
the other hand, a comparable thought experiment shows that the equivalent type (i)
counterfactual about the person’s birth is a false deviant counterfactual: considering the
actual world up until a short time before the person’s birth, then imagining that his
birth occurs, not as result of the actual course of history but as a result of an intervention, we need not conclude that the person will die. The actual sequence of events
from the person’s birth to his death involves too many coincidental events and human
choices to be replicated in every possible world in which his birth is brought about by
an exogenous intervention. Given this failure of the type (i) counterfactual to come out
as true, the person’s birth does not meet a required condition to be a cause of the
person’s death. (It is simple to see that the type (ii) counterfactual about the birth is a
true deviant counterfactual and so satisﬁes the requirement to be an enabling condition
of the death.) It is tempting to think that the causal difference between the car accident
and the person’s birth is due to the fact that the former is an abnormal event whereas
the latter is part of the normal conditions of the causal set-up. However, the real source
of the causal difference lies, I believe, in the more objective fact that the former
represents a means by which an agent with suitable powers could bring about a person’s
death, whereas the latter does not.
The Absence of a Meteor Strike
Recall that in this example we judge the state of affairs of my not being hit by a meteor
to be an enabling condition, but not a cause, of my writing this essay. The explanation
of our causal judgements about this example follows the pattern of the explanation of
the ﬁrst example. My not being hit by a meteor is not a cause of my writing this paper

