c o m p l e x i t i e s o f e v o lv e d d i v e r s i t y

49

e scientiﬁc investigation of evolved diversity of the kinds described
above challenges a central tenet of traditional views of knowledge: complexity can be explained by reduction to simple laws. It has long been
lamented by some that biology has no laws similar to the purported laws
of physics (Smart 1963; Beay 1995). at is, products of evolution and
the rules that describe their behavior appear to be more contingent and
less universal, more ephemeral, less fundamental, and hence subject to
change under a variety of contextual scenarios. e standard is clear,
and it is the one that the nineteenth-century philosophers codiﬁed and
philosophers have discussed ever since: To be a law, a generalization
must be universally true, exceptionless, and naturally necessary. Universality means that a law applies to all space and time, and if it is true and
universal, then there will be no exceptions. Nothing will escape obeying
a law of nature. ere is almost no generalization true of the biological
world that can meet these criteria of a scientiﬁc law.
Natural necessity is a more diﬃcult idea to understand. e intuition
behind the requirement of natural necessity, however, is clear. Some universal truths seem to be only accidental, while others carry a stronger
warrant. Consider the diﬀerence between the following two statements:
All gold spheres are less than a mile in diameter. All uranium spheres are
less than a mile in diameter (Goodman 1947). Both of these are true,
there are no exceptions, but the truth of the claim about uranium seems
to be necessary while the claim about gold, though true, seems to be accidentally so. It could have been the case that enough of the element of
gold was produced that a sphere of gold could be that large. But there
is something not accidental about the claim about uranium; its instability precludes having a sphere a mile in diameter. Such a sphere would
self-destruct. at diﬀerence is what is referenced by appeal to natural
necessity.2
Generalizations describing the behavior of the biological systems
produced by evolutionary processes of random mutation and natural selection do not appear to meet these stringent criteria for lawfulness. ere is even doubt that we have discovered any such strict laws
in physics (Cartwright 1983, 1994; Earman, Roberts, and Smith 2002).
Nearly everyone agrees that what we have discovered about organisms,
species, and ecosystems are contingent, local truths.3

