34

chapter two

Furthermore, although all properties, events, and structures are
physical (what else could they be?9), not all physical properties, events,
and structures are biological. Compare a conglomeration of molecules
constituting a rock with an organization of molecules making up a baby
monkey. What’s the diﬀerence? It is not to be found by looking at what
they share, namely, a materialist composition, but only by looking at how
they diﬀer. at diﬀerence, in part, is what is being picked out by identiing some higher-level structures as emergent. ere is an important,
explanatory diﬀerence that cannot be captured by the emphasis on the
reasonable claim that any simple or complex whole is made up of simpler, material parts.

Scientiﬁc Emergence
A new understanding of emergence has become widespread in scientiﬁc
accounts of biological and social phenomena that does not share either the
strong epistemic assumptions of the philosophical view Kim advocates
or a nonmaterialist metaphysics; that is, it does not preclude explanation om below or above. On this understanding, emergence is identiﬁed
with certain types of nonaggregative compositional structures, including
self-organization (see Wimsa 1986, 2000; Bedau 1997; Kauﬀman 1993,
1995; Camazine et al. 2001). Aggregativity is a particularly simple kind
of compositional relationship between component parts and the whole.
e weight of a pile of rocks being the aggregate of the weight of each
component rock is a simple example. For a more complex example, consider the behavior of a car as an aggregate of the behavior of its parts.
In these cases, the properties of the whole are predictable, explainable,
and reducible to the properties of the components. However, there are a
number of ways in which composition can fail to be aggregate and hence
fail to be reducible, on Kim’s or any other account of reduction.
One way is found in the complexity of chaotic systems represented
by nonlinear dynamics.10 Poincaré in the early 1900s discovered dynamic instability in which a physical system could end up in wildly different end states depending on very small diﬀerences in its initial state.
is sensitivity to initial conditions is oen identiﬁed with chaos. Nonlinearity, on the other hand, refers to a behavior that cannot be modeled by

