PART

III: ASCENTS

OF

LOVE

The difference is made by the rightness of the object of the Christian’s love and fear and joy. Augustine does not disagree with the Stoics
that it is inappropriate to have emotions about earthly events and
persons, seen as needed by the self. The other world is the object of
this longing: “They fear eternal punishment, they passionately desire
eternal life. They grieve because they are still groaning within themselves, waiting for the redemption of their bodies; they rejoice in hope
because ‘there shall come to pass the saying that is written: Death is
swallowed up in victory.’” (XIV.9)
After enumerating other proper occasions for Christian emotion —

both self-regarding and on behalf of others whose salvation the Christian desires — Augustine proves his point by going carefully through the

careers, first of Paul, then of Jesus, and demonstrating with ample

citations the range of emotions that were exemplified in their virtuous
lives. He insists that Christ’s emotions were not feigned, but genuine,

since he was really human and really suffering in a human body. When,

then, we read of his anger and grief, we must not doctor the reports —
we must take them to heart, as paradigms for ourselves (XTV.9). And
we must conclude from this example that even though emotions may

at times mislead us, no good life would be possible without them. To
those who argue that the good Christian may have caritas or dilectio

(translating the Greek agapé) but not amor, Augustine replies with
extensive textual argument, showing that the emotion of Peter toward
Christ is described by both Peter and Christ as amor, and that both
words can be used of appropriate, as well as inappropriate, emotions
(XIV.7).15
As for those who exalt the apatheia of the Stoic wise man, they are
doubly foolish. For “if apatheia is that condition in which no fear

frightens and no grief pains, it must be avoided in this life if we wish
to live rightly, that is, according to God.” And, furthermore, “if apath-

[present/future] and a good/bad axis: see Nussbaum [1994], Chapter 10.) In XIV.8,
Augustine has quoted Virgil’s enumeration of the four categories: “Hine metuunt

cupiuntque, dolent gaudentque” (Aen. 6.278-9). His general aim in that chapter is to

show that these emotions can belong (as can will, voluntas) to both good and bad
alike.
15 The Latin amor and amare of Augustine’s version of John 21 translate Greek philia
and phileö; not surprisingly, Jesus did not ask Peter, “Do you have erös for me?” But
since Augustine’s version occludes the distinction between philia and erös, so too, in
many ways, does his discussion.

542

