Gila Sher

The Aristotelian Society

Virtual Issue No. 1

How is this relevant to the theory of truth? It is relevant in two
directions: (a) The question of truth is central to the cognitive problem
since the difference between failing and succeeding in latching on to the
world is the difference between obtaining false and true cognitions. (b)
The question of cognition is central to truth, since one of the central
roles of truth is to distinguish between failed and successful cognitions of
the world (latching-ons to the world), or set a standard for successful
cognitions. Accordingly, a theory of truth cannot neglect external
constraint by the world. But this crucial aspect of McDowell’s
conception is entirely missing from the identity theory of truth. External
constraint plays no role in this theory.
Another way to arrive at this issue is to observe that if a theory of
truth puts McDowell’s cognitive problematics at its center, it faces a
non-trivial challenge: How to account for the truth of human thoughts
given the enormous complexity of the human cognitive situation. (How
to account for the fact that true thoughts are products of the mind yet
their truth is determined by the external world;3 how to deal with the
polarities involved in the cognitive situation, which pull us in seemingly
opposite directions.) The problem is further magnified since, as
McDowell rightly demands, we must avoid the traps of idealism on the
one hand and a Kantian thing-in-itself / empiricist ‘brute Given’ on the
other. But the identity theory cannot meet this challenge. First, identity,
as a gap-denying relation, can play at most a limited role in an account
involving gaps and non-symmetric relations (like ‘latching on’ to the
world). Second, given the complexity of the cognitive situation involved
in truth, it is quite unlikely that a theory as simple as the identity theory
has sufficient resources to account for it. Third, given the importance of
the McDowellian problematics for understanding true cognition (truth),
it requires a substantive treatment, something the identity theory is not
equipped to provide.4
Hornsby is quite aware of the fact that truth involves an independent
reality (hence gap); indeed, she regards it as a virtue of her theory that it
is compatible with commonsense realism. She is also aware that there is
an important asymmetry in truth (which cannot be captured by identity),
and that this asymmetry concerns an important aspect of truth, namely,
that it is reality which determines the truth of our thoughts, rather than
our thoughts which determine reality (Hornsby 2005, §4). But her
theory does not account for any of these things, nor do any of these
things play a substantial role in her theory. Why? I gather this is because
she realizes that accounting for these characteristics of truth would
require a substantive theory or truth and, moreover, a correspondence
3

To see that, and how, McDowell views the world as determining the truth/falsehood
of a particular truth-bearer see his example in (2005, p. 85).
4

In referring to McDowell’s problematics, I focus primarily on the early lectures in his
book. Whether any of my critical points applies to any of McDowell’s views elsewhere
in his corpus I will not be able to discuss here.
208

