G. E. M. Anscombe

(3) A was a single human, which turned into two by splitting, as
one amoeba splits and turns into two amoebas.
or
(4) A, though a whole human substantial entity, was not a human
yet; nor was it a pair of humans.
So far as I know there is no sufficient evidence for (1). Certainly
some ten years ago Professor Lejeune confessed to having no
evidence on the point. 'In man we have no data.... In ... [some
races of armadillos] the eggs do split every time into four
embryos . . . always the same number . . . So we know looking at the
armadillo and the race it belongs to, how many twins are genetically
imprinted in the first cell. In that case we know the determination of
the number of twins has occurred at the very moment of fecundation. In humans we do not know.'
If the opinion that twinning is already imprinted in the first cell is
true of humans, as it may be, then various problems do not arise.
Philosophically, if this were true, we would not have to ask about the
odd logical status of the zygote—this human entity which is an
individual substance, not part of one, and not a human.
(2) also would be acceptable for not raising any such obscure
conceptual issues. But once again, there seems not to be evidence.
The third possibility, namely that one human splits into two, I am
disposed to reject out of hand. But it needs more discussion. The
obvious objection is that in the case of the amoeba there's no doubt
we start with one amoeba and it splits into two amoebas. But in the
human case it precisely is the question whether what we start off
with is a human. What account could we give of its becoming two
humans? Neither of the two humans that eventually develop can be
identified as the same human as the zygote, because they can't both
be so, as they are different humans from one another. We might
indeed say that each had been the same human as the zygote was,
and so also the same human as the other, though they are not the
same human as one another now. But what has become of the human
that both of them once were identical with? Has he—or it—simply
ceased to exist, as we might say the parent amoeba ceases to exist on
splitting?
It is true that present non-identity of B and C does not prove that
B and C were not identical with A and so with one another. All the
same, that does not prove that B and C may each have been identical
with A. And, whether A is a human entity or an amoeba, there is the
obvious objection that before A split into B and C, B and C did not
exist.
Should we say that the amoeba, and any cell that divides, doesn't
112

