What is inference?

children have meta-beliefs about the relations between their premise judgments and
their conclusions? Do children have the concepts of premises and conclusions? Do
they have the normative concept of one belief justifying another?
Worried, perhaps, by these sorts of consideration, some philosophers have
proposed doxastic views that are ‘‘meta-propositional’’ rather than meta-attitudinal.
Philip Pettit, for example, has written:
A meta- propositional attitude is an attitude towards a proposition – if you
like, a meta- proposition – in which propositions may themselves figure as
objects of which properties and relations are predicated. Some metapropositions will ascribe properties like truth and evidential support and
relations like consistency and entailment to propositions, as in the claim that
‘p’ is true or that it is inconsistent with ‘q’. …
The absence of meta-propositional attitudes in the robot and its more flexible
counterparts means that they are subject to a salient restriction…because the
robot and its counterparts don’t have meta-propositional attitudes, they cannot
ask themselves similar questions about connections between propositions, say
about whether they are consistent or inconsistent, and then do something – pay
attention to the inter-propositional relations – out of a desire to have a belief
form one way or the other.
This restriction means that the robotic creatures cannot reason. (Pettit 2007,
pp. 498–499)
So, Pettit’s idea is that a genuine reasoner must be able to ask itself questions
about the propositions that figure in its judgments and let the answers to those
questions guide his thinking, if he is to be a genuine reasoner.
Applied to our Taking Condition, it would imply that a genuine reasoner would
have to believe (take it) that his conclusion proposition follows, in a suitably broad
sense, from his premise propositions and let that guide what conclusion he arrives
at. Someone performing the seemingly simple (Rain) inference would have to have
the meta-propositional belief
(Meta-Rain): (3) follows from (1) and (2).
Now, this proposal successfully evades the first objection to the meta-attitudinal
proposal; but it seems to leave the second one in place: we still seem committed to
attributing to ordinary thinkers implausibly sophisticated concepts and propositional
attitudes. Do Luke and Drew, playing hide-and-seek, really need to have the concept
of a proposition, and the concept of one proposition following from another?
To deal with this residual problem, we could try going even more first-order,
requiring only that a reasoner have a belief in the appropriate conditional:
(First Order Rain Belief, FORB): If It rained last night and If it rained last
night, then the streets are wet, then, the streets are wet.
But this proposal only invites new objections.
First, we know from Carroll’s famous note (1895) that we must at all costs avoid
insisting that (FORB) be part of the premises from which the conclusion of the
(Rain) inference is to be derived. In that direction lies a vicious regress from which

123

