P. Boghossian

8 The counterfactual proposal
Let us take stock. I have argued that a thinker doesn’t count as reasoning unless, in
some appropriate sense, he takes his premises to support his conclusion. And I have
looked at all the major ways of understanding this taking in terms of some occurrent
intentional state. Of these ways, the most promising, I believe, is the intuitional
proposal, though even it faces severe difficulties.
The question arises, therefore, whether there is some other way of satisfying the
Taking Condition, other than through an occurrent intentional state. I can think of
two.
The first attempts to account for the nature of inference counterfactually.7
What is it for S to infer (3) from (1) and (2)? According to the Counterfactual
Proposal, the answer is: His beliefs in (1) and (2) cause S to believe (3). And, were
he to be asked why he believe (3), he would offer (1) and (2) as his reasons for
believing (3). And it is the truth of this counterfactual—that S would offer (1) and
(2) as his reasons for believing (3)—that makes them his reasons for believing (3).
There need be no occurrent intentional state contemporaneous with the 1-2-3
transition that constitutes S’s taking the premises to justify his conclusion. Rather,
the difference between a mere transition and an inference consists in the holding of
the counterfactual: Were S to be asked (or perhaps were he just to ask himself) why
he believes (3), he would cite (1) and (2) as his reasons.
I don’t believe that this proposal can be correct.
For one thing, it seems to run into the old problem of demanding an unreasonable
degree of sophistication from reasoners.
But its main difficulty is that it treats the property of being an inference as though
it were a response-dependent property, which I believe it cannot be.
A property is response-dependent, roughly, if our disposition under certain
circumstances to say that something has that property analytically entails that it has
the property in question.
Hume’s account of beauty is such a theory. According to Hume, what makes it
the case that something is beautiful is that a preponderance of suitably ideal judges
would judge it to be beautiful. Another favorite candidate for response-dependent
treatment is color.
There are many difficulties making sense of response-dependent properties in
general (for some discussion see Boghossian 1989a, b). But at least such accounts
have a certain face plausibility in the cases of color and beauty.
However, the property of a person’s thinking something for a reason is not
response-dependent. To say that R was S’s reason for A’ing implies that S took R to
support his A’ing at the time that he A’ed, and that his so taking it led to his A’ing.
I don’t see how S’s being disposed to say that R was his reason for A’ing could
make it the case that he took R to support his A’ing and that this taking had a certain
causal impact. His saying it might be very good evidence that R was his reason. But
7

I have not tracked down a reference for this view in the literature. It was suggested to me in discussion
by Tim Scanlon as a view that he was sympathetic to, although I wouldn’t want to commit him to it on
such a slender basis.

123

