92

Confounding

Fine Point 7.3
Surrogate confounders. Under the causal DAG in Figure 7.8, there is confounding for the eﬀect of  on  because
of the presence of the unmeasured common cause  . The measured variable  is a proxy or surrogate for  . For
example, the unmeasured variable socioeconomic status  may confound the eﬀect of physical activity  on the risk
of cardiovascular disease  . Income  is a surrogate for the often ill-defined variable socioeconomic status. Should
we adjust for the variable ? On the one hand, it can be said that  is not a confounder because it does not lie on
a backdoor path between  and  . On the other hand, adjusting for the measured , which is associated with the
unmeasured  , may indirectly adjust for some of the confounding caused by  . In the extreme, if  were perfectly
correlated with  then it would make no diﬀerence whether one conditions on  or on  . Indeed if  is binary and is
a nondiﬀerentially missclassified (see Chapter 9) version of  , conditioning on  will result in a partial blockage of the
backdoor path  ←  →  under some weak conditions (Greenland 1980, Ogburn and VanderWeele 2012). Therefore
we will typically prefer to adjust, rather than not to adjust, for .
We refer to variables that can be used to reduce confounding bias even though they are not on a backdoor path (and
so could never completely eliminate confounding) as surrogate confounders. A possible strategy to fight confounding is
to measure as many surrogate confounders as possible and adjust for all of them. See Chapter 18 for discussion.

VanderWeele and Shpitser (2013)
also proposed a formal definition of
confounder.

those so-called confounders. If the adjusted and unadjusted estimates differ, the traditional approach declares the existence of confounding. However,
change in estimates may occur for reasons other than confounding, including
selection bias when adjusting for non-confounders (see Chapter 8) and the use
of noncollapsible eﬀect measures (see Fine Point 4.3). Attempts to define confounding based on change in estimates have been long abandoned because of
these problems.
In contrast, a structural approach starts by explicitly identifying the sources
of confounding–the common causes of treatment and outcome that, were they
all measured, would be suﬃcient to adjust for confounding–and then identifies
a suﬃcient set of adjustment variables.
The structural approach makes clear that including a particular variable
in a suﬃcient set depends on the variables already included in the set. For
example, in Figures 7.2 and 7.3 the set of variables  is needed to block a
backdoor path because the set of variables  is not measured. We could then
say that the variables in  are confounders. However, if the variables  had
been measured and used to block the backdoor path, then the variables 
would not be confounders given  (see also Fine Point 7.3). Given a causal
DAG, confounding is an absolute concept whereas confounder is a relative one.
A structural approach to confounding emphasizes that causal inference from
observational data requires a priori causal knowledge. This causal knowledge
is summarized in a causal DAG that encodes the researchers’ beliefs or assumptions about the causal network. Of course, there is no guarantee that the
researchers’ causal DAG is correct and thus it is possible that, contrary to the
researchers’ beliefs, their chosen set of adjustment variables fails to eliminate
confounding or introduces selection bias. However, the structural approach
to confounding has two important advantages. First, it prevents inconsistencies between beliefs and actions. For example, if you believe Figure 7.4 is the
true causal diagram–and therefore that there is no confounding for the eﬀect
of  on  –then you will not adjust for the variable , regardless of what
non-structural definitions of confounder may say. Second, the researchers’ assumptions about confounding become explicit and therefore can be explicitly
criticized by other investigators.

