110

Selection bias

A competing event is an event that
prevents the outcome of interest
from happening. A typical example of competing event is death because, once an individual dies, no
other outcomes can occur.

A

Y

been censored, and thus there is no point in constructing a pseudo-population
in which everybody is censored. For example, the tree in Figure 8.10 shows
that Pr[ = 1| = 0  = 0] = 0, but this zero does not aﬀect our ability to
construct a pseudo-population in which nobody is censored.
The third condition is consistency, including well-defined interventions. IP
weighting is used to create a pseudo-population in which censoring  has been
abolished, and in which the eﬀect of the treatment  is the same as in the
original population. Thus, the pseudo-population eﬀect measure is equal to
the eﬀect measure had nobody been censored. This eﬀect measure may be
relatively well defined when censoring is the result of loss to follow up or nonresponse, but not when censoring is defined as the occurrence of a competing
event. For example, in a study aimed at estimating the eﬀect of certain treatment on the risk of Alzheimer’s disease, death from other causes (cancer, heart
disease, and so on) is a competing event. Defining death as a form of censoring
is problematic: we might not wish to base our eﬀect estimates on a pseudopopulation in which all other causes of death have been removed, because it
is unclear even conceptually what sort of intervention would produce such a
population. Also, no feasible intervention could possibly remove just one cause
of death without aﬀecting the others as well.
Finally, one could argue that IP weighting is not necessary to adjust for
selection bias in a setting like that described in Figure 8.3. Rather, one might
attempt to remove selection bias by stratification (i.e., by estimating the effect measure conditional on the  variables) rather than by IP weighting.
Stratification could yield unbiased conditional eﬀect measures within levels of
 because conditioning on  is suﬃcient to block the backdoor path from 
to  . That is, the conditional risk ratio
Pr [ = 1| = 1  = 0  = ]  Pr [ = 1| = 0  = 0  = ]

E
Figure 8.12

YO
A

YA

E

YE

Y

Figure 8.13

can be interpreted as the eﬀect of treatment among the uncensored with  = .
For the same reason, under the null, stratification would work (i.e., it would
provide an unbiased conditional eﬀect measure) if the data can be represented
by the causal structure in Figure 8.5. Stratification, however, would not work
under the structure depicted in Figures 8.4 and 8.6. Take Figure 8.4. Conditioning on  blocks the backdoor path from  to  but also opens the path
 →  ←  →  from  to  because  is a collider on that path. Thus,
even if the causal eﬀect of  on  is null, the conditional (on ) risk ratio
would be generally diﬀerent from 1. And similarly for Figure 8.6. In contrast,
IP weighting appropriately adjusts for selection bias under Figures 8.3-8.6 because this approach is not based on estimating eﬀect measures conditional on
the covariates , but rather on estimating unconditional eﬀect measures after
reweighting the individuals according to their treatment and their values of .
This is the first time we discuss a situation in which stratification cannot
be used to validly compute the causal eﬀect of treatment, even if the three
conditions of exchangeability, positivity, and consistency hold. We will discuss
other situations with a similar structure in Part III when considering the eﬀect
of time-varying treatments.

8.6 Selection without bias
The causal diagram in Figure 8.12 represents a hypothetical study with dichotomous variables surgery , certain genetic haplotype , and death  .

