3/10/2021

e.Prooﬁng

then we can argue that any old probability ascription models chance. (Schaffer,
2007, for examples, raises this kind of challenge to Loewer, 2001).
On the other hand, Laws and Conditions Test restricts what counts as admissible
information to information about the present and past but not information about the
future. What non-arbitrary justification is there for counting the present and past as
admissible but not the future? In lieu of some argument for either Macrophysical
Test or Laws and Conditions Test from premises that do not beg the question
against either the compatibilist or the incompatibilist, the strategy of using chance’s
predictive role as a guide to where the chances ends in stalemate.

4. Moving forward
4.1. Chance’s role in probabilistic explanation
Of the four tests discussed above, which, if any, is correct? Let’s start answering
that question by first considering the tests that go by way of chance’s explanatory
role.
Whether Good Explanation Test is true depends, of course, on where we draw the
line between an ideal explanatory text and no explanation at all. As noted above,
however, I think that there are too many ways for probability ascriptions to feature
in merely good explanations without being true or without being about chance to
warrant much confidence in Good Explanation Test.
Ideal Explanation Test is motivated by the attractive thought that a probability
ascription could not be a non-eliminable part of an ideal explanatory text of an
event’s occurrence without also being an accurate description of the event’s chance
of occurring. Furthermore, Ideal Explanation Test provides a tractable way into the
debate between the compatibilist and the incompatibilist through the somewhat
firmer ground of our judgements about the content of ideal scientific explanations.
For these reasons, Ideal Explanation Test seems to be a plausible and helpful guide
to where the chances are—the chances are wherever the probability ascriptions of
ideal scientific explanations say that they are.
It is nowhere near as clear where things stand with the tests that go by way of
chance’s predictive role. What we would like is an argument for either Laws and
Conditions Test or for Macrophysical Test from premises that do not presuppose a
verdict on whether chance and determinism are compatible or on whether there can
be macrophysical chances that are independent of microphysical chances. And it is
obviously no help to replace both Laws and Conditions Test and Macrophysical Test
with a more flexible but less informative “admissibility” test. Such a strategy
simply passes the buck; now the problem is to give some non-question begging
argument about when (or whether) the laws and conditions are admissible and when
(or whether) only the macrophysical laws and conditions are admissible. Our
problem is not a lack of clever ways to define “admissible information” so as to
sidestep one argument or another. Instead, our problem is to provide motivation for
some such definition without prejudging the question of where the chances are.
Both the compatibilist and incompatibilist should acknowledge that chance plays
some predictive role and that chance’s predictive role can be a guide to which
probability ascriptions accurately describe a world’s chances. If we are to use
chance’s predictive role to adjudicate between the compatibilist and incompatibilist,
https://eprooﬁng.springer.com/journals_v2/printpage.php?token=DwNxx4zkpFLLJXb8ERPNmJj-3hDUWc6wmupgptGsQtSxMbg-iFzAdbMg0PXxae4z

12/24

