3/10/2021

e.Prooﬁng

chance of an outcome is extremal (i.e., is between 0 and 1), and yet has a nonextremal credence in that outcome (i.e., a credence of either 0 or 1).
Of course, a crucial assumption in the PP-based argument for incompatibilism is
that the laws of nature and a complete description of the present (or past) state of
the world at a time is admissible. If that assumption is denied, then the above
argument is no good. Loewer (2001) and Glynn (2010) both offer formulations the
Principal Principle on which what is admissible is relativized to a “level”. The
rough idea is that information about the microphysical state of the world or about
the microphysical laws is inadmissible when assessing certain probability
ascriptions (such as those that appear in non-fundamental physical theories) but
information about the present macrophysical state of the world or about the present
macrophysical laws is admissible (provided that it is about the appropriate
“level”).8
The idea that admissible information is at least sometimes restricted to information
about the macrophysical present or about the macrophysical laws motivates a more
compatibilist-friendly test of whether a probability ascription models chance, which
I call “Macrophysical Laws and Macrophysical Conditions Test”, or
“Macrophysical Test” for short:
Macrophysical Laws and Macrophysical Conditions Test: If the
content of the macrophysical natural laws and a macrophysical
description of the present state of the world is better grounds for our
expectation that event o occurs than is a sentence of the form, “the
present probability of [event] o is equal to [real number] n”, then
either the sentence is false or the sentence is not about chance.
Macrophysical Test lets the compatibilist square chance’s predictive role with
compatibilism. That the world is deterministic, she argues, is consistent with there
being probabilistic macrophysical laws. These probabilistic macrophysical laws
combine with the macrophysical conditions of the world to determine the (nonextremal) macrophysical chances—despite there being more fundamental
deterministic laws. In turn, these macrophysical chances play an important
predictive role; the macrophysical chances are the best macrophysical evidence we
have about what the future will like, though information about the microphysical
features of the world may be even better evidence about what the future will be like.
On this picture, information about the microphysical features of the world is like
information about the record of a chance event or about the predictions of a reliable
crystal ball; all such evidence about an event’s occurrence might be better evidence
than is the outcome’s chance of occurring, but that such evidence is possible to
obtain is simply irrelevant to the question of where the chances are.
From the point of view of the incompatibilist, however, Macrophysical Test seems
ad hoc—motivated only by the very premise that the incompatibilist denies. Once
we have retreated from Laws and Conditions Test to Macrophysical Test, what nonarbitrary reason can be given to not keep going? If we sufficiently restrict the kinds
of evidence that a probability ascription must be as good as if it is to be true and
about chance, i.e., if we sufficiently restrict what counts as admissible information,

https://eprooﬁng.springer.com/journals_v2/printpage.php?token=DwNxx4zkpFLLJXb8ERPNmJj-3hDUWc6wmupgptGsQtSxMbg-iFzAdbMg0PXxae4z

11/24

