188

Stephen Schiffer

symptom may be conclusive evidence that I have a certain disease, even though
I am unaware of the symptom, unaware that I have the disease, and would be
unaware that the symptom was evidence of the disease even if Iwere aware
of it.
On the intended reading of HAS, in order for E to be a justification that S has
to believe P, S must know, or at least believe, E—or at least simply have E, if E
is an experience or sensation. (Ifwe assume Williamson’s theory, wherein only
evidence can justify and a proposition belongs to S’s total evidence just in case S
knows it,! then E is a justification that S Aas for believing P if and only if E is a
justification for S to believe P and S knows E.)

On the intended reading of IN, E can be a justification that S has for
believing P and yet not be what justifies S im believing P, even though S is
justified in believing P. For example, $ may know a certain fact about a DNA
fingerprint found in a hair sample at the scene of a murder; this fact may be
virtually conclusive evidence that the chauffeur was the murderer; and S may not
know that the DNA fingerprint implicates the chauffeur yet still be justified in
believing that the chauffeur committed the murder on the basis of knowing that
two independent and uninvolved witnesses say they saw the chauffeur commit
the murder. To be justified in believing P is to believe P and to be justified
in doing so, and for E to be what justifies S in believing P it must be that
S believes P on the basis of S’s having, knowing, or at least believing E, in a
sense of “on the basis of” that awaits explication but can be used to sort cases.
Assuming Williamson’s theory of evidence (see below), we may say that evidence
E justifies S in believing P only if S’s knowing E accounts for the fact that S is
justified in believing P. This in turn implies that, all other things being equal,
if E justifies S in believing P, then S would not be so justified if S did not
know E.
' ‘Williamson’s equating a person’s evidence with her knowledge—an equation he calls E = K
(p. 185)—is a cornerstone of his theory of evidence (unless otherwise noted, all page references

for Williamson are to Knowledge and its Limits). The doctrine that only evidence can justify
belief occurs in a few places (e.g., p. 208), and is evidently also pretty central to Williamson’s
theory. It has, however, a weak and a strong reading. The weak reading is that if E justifies one’s

believing P, then E is known, and thus, by E = K, belongs to one’s total evidence. The stronger
reading is that, if E justifies one’s believing P, then E is evidence for P for one. Williamson
sometimes gives the impression that he accepts the stronger reading, as when he says that “evidence

for a mathematical conjecture may consist of mathematical knowledge” (p. 207), but here he is
probably using “evidence” in a loose vernacular way, since on his account of evidence, nothing
can be evidence for a mathematical proposition, and no mathematical proposition can be evidence

for any proposition. This is because E is evidence for P only if it raises the probability of P,
in the sense that Prob(P/E)

> Prob P, and for Williamson every mathematical proposition has

probability 1 or 0. The fact that nothing can be evidence for a mathematical proposition may
be taken to be a problem for Williamson’s theory of evidence, since we may well want to say
such things as that my evidence for P’s being a theorem of number theory is that the brilliant
number theorist Jones told me that it was. We needn't, however, bother about any of this, since
all the issues in this chapter about what a person is justified in believing pertain only to contingent
propositions,

