[ 90 ]

C h a pt e r Fo u r

residing in other, overlooked, empirically robust, minority representations. Pernicious reification blocks the road of robust inquiry.3
In contrast, contextual objectivity results from the purposeful and intentional ontologization of representations within an appropriate scope.
If pernicious reification is an epistemic and practical failure, contextual
objectivity is a knowledge-enhancing and concrete success. If the former is
diseased ontologizing, the latter is healthy ontologizing. My analysis is a
response to the biologists Richard Levins and Richard Lewontin’s worry
that “the problem for science is to understand the proper domain of explanation of each abstraction rather than become its prisoner.”4
I illustrate these two concepts through the evolution of the still cartographically dominant Mercator projection, from Gerardus Mercator’s
original 1569 map to the new online standard Web Mercator.
Even when we are enraptured with single theories or projections, all is
not lost. I show how the tool of integration platforms can motivate the scientific community; philosophers, historians, and sociologists of science;
and the lay public to place representations in their respective appropriate
explanatory and predictive context, thereby avoiding or uprooting pernicious reification. One such integration platform I call beyond Mercator.

Pernicious Reification
Pernicious reification is the ontologizing— and universalizing or narrowing, or both— of a single imperialistic abstraction. It is mistaking your
abstracted map for the world in all its detailed glory. Pernicious reification is imagining Earth actually as a Mercator projection; or conceiving
evolution exclusively as the process of selfish genes duking it out on the
ecological stage; or insisting that Homo sapiens is sharply separated into
racial or ethnic groups. It is believing that you can hold the entire world
in your palm (rather: that the map or theory or model you hold in your
palm is the entire world); and that, by closing your conceptual fist tightly
around it, you fully feel the world, know it, and control it. You fail to

3. According to Peirce (1998a), the “sole” “rule of reason” is “in order to learn
you must desire to learn and in so desiring not be satisfied with what you already
incline to think.” The “corollary” which followed from this, and which he feels
should “be inscribed upon every wall of the city of philosophy” is: “Do not block
the way of inquiry” (48); see also Haack 2014.
4. Levins and Lewontin 1985, 150. See also J. M. Kaplan and Winther 2013.

