2.5 • Writing Process: Thinking Critically about How Identity Is Constructed Through Writing

s

this space, conduct an hour-long observation. Respond in writing to these items: Describe the space in detail.
What do you see permanently affixed in the space? What activity is going on? How is the space currently used?
What is the atmosphere? How are you feeling while conducting your observation? Then, do some brief
research on the space (using the Internet, the library, or campus archives), and answer these questions: What
is the history of the space? When was it established, and under what circumstances? How has this space been
used in the past? What is your response or reaction to this history? Then write a passage in which you
highlight a unique feature of the space and your cultural relationship to it.

Another Lens 2. Considering Du Bois’s theory of double consciousness, explore the ways in which you may
experience competing identities or competing cultures in your own life. What experiences have you had or
end s
witnessed where language clashed with or supported your identity or culture? What happened?
How did
others react? How did you react? What insight does your experience offer on this discussion of rhetoric and the
power of language to define, shape, and change or give birth to identity or culture?

Quick Launch: Joining the Dialogue
You may choose to use journaling to develop your language use and voice. Journaling, or keeping a written
record of your thoughts and ideas, can clarify your thoughts and emotions, help you better understand your
values, and increase your creativity. The following two journaling techniques should help you get started.
Character Sketch and Captured Moment
Because your cultural artifact may be tied to a person, a character sketch might help you think about its
significance. A character sketch is a brief description of a real or fictional person—in this case, likely someone
you know or even yourself. In it, you describe the character’s personality, physical traits, habits, history,
relationships, and ties to the cultural artifact. You may include research about the character to introduce
readers to them. Use the following format if you need more guidance:
Character Sketch
•
◦
◦
◦

Introduction
Quotation
Anecdote about the character
Most important traits

•
◦
◦
◦
◦
◦

Supporting Details
Physical appearance
Actions
Thoughts
Language
Ties to cultural artifact

A character sketch of your grandmother might read as follows.
My first memory of Nonna materializes in the kitchen, where we are baking Swedish cookies together. She
carefully shows me how to measure ingredients, stirring with her hand over mine in her deep “cookie-making”
bowl. Nonna is a slight woman with a big heart full of kindness. She teaches me many skills, both in and out of
the kitchen, that I still use today. Some have proven to be life lessons. She never met a stranger she didn’t like
and often said it takes more effort to be unkind than kind. Because of Nonna, the Swedish cookie has become a
metaphor for my life. The ingredients of one’s life make up an identity, and the combination is always delicious.
Another journaling technique is to record a captured moment through the examination of a cultural artifact.
This exercise lets you use an artifact as a means to look at an event in your life and create a written piece that
captures its importance, emotion, or meaning. Select an artifact and an experience. Think about what they
mean to you. What do you remember, and why? Then go deeper. Analyze the long-term meaning of it in your

49

