622

19 • Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

All speech is designed for a particular audience at a particular time. Because effective speakers seek to know
their audience, they consider demography, the statistical study of human populations, focusing on categories
such as age, gender, education, religion, race, and so forth. Demographics are the statistical data gathered
from studies in these and other areas relating to populations. Although your audience may be quite specific
and you may know some of its demographics, it is important to design your script outline to include examples,
ideas, and appeals that are broadly understood. The circumstances that lead your audience to you will also
influence their interest and reaction to your presentation. A presentation to a captive audience—those who
attend because of some outside force rather than their own choice—will require you to spend more time
building common ground than you would with an audience you know to be more receptive. Contrast this
situation with a speech at a political rally, where voluntary attendees are likely to share political beliefs. As is
evident, understanding your audience is imperative to knowing how to speak to them. Considering their
attitudes, beliefs, cultures, and values, including those they share with one another and with you as the
speaker, will allow you to understand how much attention you need to devote to convincing the audience of
your viewpoint.
When analyzing your audience in this way, you also will want to consider their prior knowledge and
relationship with the topic. Do they already have a solid understanding of the topic? If they do, there is no need
to spend much time on background information. Are they largely opposed to the premise of your thesis? If so,
you will need to provide effective reasoning and strong evidence to convince them. The amount of background
knowledge required will influence how you shape your script or outline and thus your speech.
Audience awareness also can help you decide which rhetorical appeals and devices to use within your script.
You need to consider how you relate to the audience. Are you an expert on a topic? Are you a peer in their
community? Do you (or they) have cultural intricacies that influence your understanding of the topic? These
questions, combined with cultural awareness, can guide your composition.

Cultural Context
Culture—the shared values, customs, arts, and other traits of a group of people—is an important consideration
when developing a relationship with your audience. Speech—particularly formal, persuasive speech—is a part
of the American social and political systems. Candidates for political office commonly use speech during
campaigns. Consider former president Barack Obama’s (b. 1961) introductory speech at the 2004 Democratic
National Convention (https://openstax.org/r/introductory_speech), which political scholars credit with his rise
to the presidency. Lawyers regularly use speech to argue their cases before judges and juries. Religious leaders
have long used speech from the pulpit to challenge and influence congregants. Moreover, as American culture
morphs and grows, speech has become an important part of everyday life in ways not witnessed in earlier
times.
Radio and television have existed as vehicles for delivering speech for many years. But in the past two decades,
speech has found new outlets, including podcasts (streamed spoken-word audio), YouTube videos, and social
media videos. This influx of new formats has created a cultural shift, making speech, and by extension its
influences on a large audience, more accessible and representative. This shift has also increased the level of
social, political, and economic activism. Understanding the cultural context of your audience and the subject
of your speech is as important as any other part of it, for this context will dictate whether your words are
effectively received.

Access for free at openstax.org.

