article through your library website. If you don’t have immediate full-text access, you
may be able to get it through inter-library loan.
3. Use the “cited by” feature. If you get one great hit on Google Scholar, you can quickly see
a list of other papers that cited it. For example, the search terms “crime economics”
yielded this hit for a 1988 paper that appeared in a journal called Kyklos:

Figure 4.1, Google Scholar

1988 is nearly 30 years ago; for a social-science paper you probably want more recent sources.
You can see that, according to Google, this paper was cited by 392 other sources. You can click
on that “Cited by 392” to see that list. You can even search within that list of 392 if you’re
trying to narrow down the topic. For example, you could search on the term “cities” to see
which of those 392 articles are most likely to be about the economic impact of crime on cities.

Library research as problem-solving
You’ll probably engage the subscription article databases at different points in the process.
For example, imagine you’ve been assigned a research paper that can focus on any topic
relevant to the course. Imagine further that you don’t have a clue about where to start and
aren’t entirely sure what counts as an appropriate topic in this discipline. A great approach is
to find the top journals in the specific field of your course and browse through recent issues to
see what people are publishing on. For example, when I assign an open-topic research paper
in my Introduction to Sociology course, I suggest that students looking for a topic browse
recent issues of Social Problems or American Journal of Sociology and find an article that looks
interesting. They’ll have a topic and—booyah!—their first source. An instructor of a class on
kinesiology might recommend browsing Human Movement Science, the Journal of Strength and
Conditioning Research, or Perceptual and Motor Skills.
When you have a topic and are looking for a set of sources, your biggest challenge is finding
the right keywords. You’ll never find the right sources without them. You’ll obviously start
with words and phrases from the assignment prompt, but you can’t stop there. As explained
42 | Secondary Sources in Their Natural Habitats

