“”What Truth Is”’’ — 2018/3/20 — 14:28 — page 66 — #78

66

arguments for truthmaking

course, once prompted, one can always produce the relevant utterance:
‘a and b are quarks makes it true that a and b have something in
common’. But that response misses the point. There are ways things
are which we don’t know about, which we haven’t named, and about
which we may never utter a word. Then there will never be an instance
of (2.8) mentioning such ways. Nevertheless, things which are those
ways all have something in common. The nominalist can’t account
for this.
(Should the nominalist go more extreme, and deny that things
are ways of which we haven’t yet thought or spoken? That form of
extreme idealism is very confused. We discover new features of the
world all the time. That’s to say we discover things (and ways those
things are) which pre-date our discoveries. It isn’t our investigations
that make those things the ways they are. It’s worth noting that
my present opponent is an extreme nominalist, and that she has
no business going in for this extreme idealism. Idealists hold that
certain features of the world depend on our language, or concepts,
or thought, or proofs, or computations. So our idealist will happily
say that there are properties, numbers, other mathematical entities,
spacetime points and so on; but she will hold that they are constructs
which depend on us. Contrast this with the extreme nominalist’s view,
on which there no such things.)
Our nominalist had better back up. Her instances of (2.8) had
better go beyond the ways we’ve named. And, most likely, it will have
to go beyond the ways we could name. So she won’t write her list
in English or any other natural language. Her best bet is to say her
theory consists of all propositions (many nominalists will shudder)
of the form indicated by (2.8).
Now recall what we said in §1.2 about the deflationist’s attempt
to form such a list of propositions. She had to accept the structured
notion (either Fregean or Russellian) of a proposition. The same
argument applies here. On the sets-of-possible-worlds account, there
is but one instance of (2.8): the set of all worlds. (That’s because the
nominalist needs to treat (2.8) as a necessary truth, which corresponds
to the set of all possible worlds.) By contrast, pleonastic propositions,

