taking in whatever happens to come our way — we also (and often) make efforts
to have certain kinds of evidence or knowledge come in or to learn something
new. If I want to know whether Jess is at work today, I’m not going to just sit still
and wait for some relevant information to float by. Instead, I’ll go downstairs to
her office and knock on her door or send her a text. In cases like this I do things
to make it the case that I end up with certain kinds of information — effectively, I
perform an experiment or ask a question (of the world, perhaps) and put myself
in a position to get an answer.7 When we learn as the result of an experiment that
we design and execute (like walking downstairs and knocking on the door), our
learning is not accidental but intentional or by design. The doxastic paradigm
has had a lot to say about accidental learning, but much less about learning by
design.
But it’s not at all obvious that accidental and intentional learning are radically different in kind rather than fairly continuous. For some inspiration on
this sort of continuity, here is the 19th-century astronomer John Herschel on
the close connection between observation and experiment:
But experience may be acquired in two ways: either, first, by noticing facts
as they occur, without any attempt to influence the frequency of their occurrence, or to vary the circumstances under which they occur; this is OBSERVATION ; or, secondly, by putting in action causes and agents over which
we have control, and purposely varying their combinations, and noticing
what effects take place; this is EXPERIMENT. To these two sources we must
look as the fountains of all natural science. It is not intended, however,
by thus distinguishing observation from experiment, to place them in any
kind of contrast. Essentially they are much alike, and differ rather in degree
than in kind; so that, perhaps, the terms passive and active observation
might better express their distinction; but it is, nevertheless, highly important to mark the different states of mind in inquiries carried on by their
respective aids, as well as their different effects in promoting the progress
of science. In the former, we sit still and listen to a tale, told us, perhaps obscurely, piecemeal, and at long intervals of time, with our attention more or
less awake. It is only by after-rumination that we gather its full import; and
often, when the opportunity is gone by, we have to regret that our attention was not more particularly directed to some point which, at the time,
appeared of little moment, but of which we at length appretiate the impor7
Jaakko Hintikka — in e.g., Hintikka (1981) — describes his interrogative model of scientific inquiry as one according to which scientific inquiry centrally involves “putting questions to nature”.
Hintikka claims to be borrowing the metaphor from Kant, who may have been borrowing it from
Francis Bacon.

6

